 Measuring the Big Picture That Affects Our Daily Lives
Countries and institutions have committed to impacts, outcomes, and goals
for human well-being and equity and sustainability to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. Most conventional measurement
instruments and indicators of social and economic progress do not measure
these commitments and goals adequately, and they do not measure the root
factors that give rise to these problems in the first place, such as the greed
that stops equity from being present in our world of abundance; the
diminished self-worth that inflicts exploitation and domination over others;
the unwarranted fears that stop us from having the courage for
compassionate action. We measure production of goods and services,
investments in infrastructure, and selected social indicators related to
income, health, education, food, and nutrition. These are important, but they
do not provide the true measures of the quality of our lives and our human
potential and capacity—the most important asset of any person, family,
group, or nation.
   Simultaneously, we are inspired by stories of extraordinary acts of
courage from every corner of the world, illustrating alternatives being put in
place by committed and creative people. In order to see this emerging
reality unfold, in which equity, dignity, and prosperity are present, new
metrics and frameworks are needed that will track progress and change well
beyond what exists today.
  Many economists recommend going beyond GDP (gross domestic
product) to measure how well an economy is doing.55 GDP measures the
production of goods and services in a country and counts the ones that
benefit people in the same way as those that are not beneficial and can even
be harmful for people—for example, the production of pesticides that are
harmful for human health and diminish biodiversity are counted in the same
way as the production of healthy organic food.
  Wealth is defined as having assets and savings, instead of having debt
and liabilities.56 Policies and strategies that foster wealth instead of debt
and liabilities result in household sustainability. We could have savings and
assets resulting in sufficiency and sustainability, if the financial engines of
today did not drive growth through debt and liabilities at the macro and
household levels.
  The underlying factors that generate an equitable and thriving humanity
and planet are in an acausal domain. These aspects, such as the universal
values we embody and who we are BEING, are beyond conventional
measurable cause-and-effect relationships or correlations. New metrics,
proxy indicators, and measures are necessary to capture these aspects.
   Bhutan’s initiative to measure inner capacities is inspiring. In the 1990s
Bhutan embarked on measuring “gross national happiness” (GNH). They
defined happiness as “a state of well-being and contentment.”57 Well-being
included health, nutrition, having information and education, thoughtful
consumption, decent work, care, housing near one’s workplace, security,
and healthful environments. Their understanding of contentment is earnest
and deep, and includes: being able to express creativity, being respected and
respecting others, being able to express one’s feelings and thoughts freely,
having a personal ethical code, and being able to cooperate and share with
others.
   Contentment is the key to shifting our scarcity mindset to a perception of
abundance and prosperity. Bhutan’s knowledge and wisdom are reflected in
their insightful and intelligent understanding that gross national happiness is
more important than gross national product. As such, gross national
happiness fosters a human society where material and spiritual development
occur side by side to complement and reinforce each other. This is an
immediate challenge to conventional development models that focus only
on economic growth as the ultimate objective.
   New measurements across the conscious full-spectrum response template
stimulate us to ask a different set of questions. These are given in Figure
10-3, Measurement for Equity and Prosperity. Here are some questions we
can ask for transforming today’s challenges with existing and new metrics.

   Do we have proxy measures to see when universal values form the basis
   of policies, decisions, and strategies? For example, measures of
   contentment?
   How can we track the presence of ethical leadership and stewardship?
   How do we measure our well-being, contentment, and sufficiency?
   What resources—human, social, natural, and physical—can we pass on
   to future generations?

   This is not about expecting people to be satisfied with whatever little
they have, nor is it a romanticized view of happy poor people. It is about
authentic happiness, a state of BEING in which we are anchored in
universal values and manifest our full potential and capabilities.
   We ask about the systems and cultural norms that indicate what we need
to shift on policies, programs, and actions:

   Will the data and indicators measure the establishment of inclusive
   systems and cultural norms that foster well-being of people and the
   planet?
   Have we created mechanisms to enhance our capabilities and the
   opportunities for us to utilize them? What measures do we have?
   Do we have political and social voice, and are we able to dissent
   without fear, based on universal values?
   What indices are we using to ensure equity, good governance, and a
   thriving planet?
   What are the measures to make mid-course corrections?
   Are we investing in a socially and environmentally sustainable way?
   Have we started authentic accounting systems, in which we internalize
   the true cost of products, instead of obfuscating the true cost?
   Do we value and account for household services and costs—or is only
   what we obtain in the market “valuable” and therefore accounted for?
   Are we redirecting the course of true economic well-being from the
   growth-at-any-cost paradigm to prosperity as the basis of thriving?

  We must also ask questions about our everyday life, our basic needs,
about thriving in an equitable society:

   Do we have data on access to and utilization of services for basic needs
   —health, nutrition, and healthy food; education; energy; housing;
   internet and communication, life-enhancing leisure; cultural, natural,
   and recreational activities; and fair financing?
   Do we highlight the distribution of these services to ensure equity and
   sustainability?
   What income, consumption, and wealth indices do we use? Are they
   based on debt or savings, because debt does not lead to stability?
   What are our profits and who benefits?

  As citizens, business leaders, scholars and experts, and providers of
social services, we need to understand the measures now being used to
promote human progress and advocate for change based on informed and
universal value–based perspectives. We should not conveniently side with
opinions that emanate from limited understanding or vested interests.
               Figure 10-3 . Measurement for Equity and Prosperity.



Fallacy: The measures that indicate how well the economy is
doing, such as GDP, are very complicated. We should leave it up
to experts and economists to tell us what is happening. It is
confusing because different economists have different opinions,
so we may as well leave it to them to sort it out. All I really care
about is how well my family is doing.
New Learning: As citizens, we need to inform ourselves about
how well the economy is doing, whether there is equity or not,
and how these are being measured. Expert opinions are useful
 when they uphold equity and sustainability for people. The well-
 being of my family depends upon the quality of our lives, equity
 for all, and how wealth is created and distributed. I can make a
 difference by understanding the situation and speaking up for the
 changes we need for my family and community.

      Measurement for a Paradigm Shift—Our Work in
                        Progress
Measuring equity and sustainability is work in progress—we must consider
what we measure, how we measure, who measures for whom, and the
decisions we make based on our measurement of data and information.

To Be Measured Meaningfully, Stability Must Be Anchored in
Universal Values
The essential stability of human endeavors and the futures we create are
grounded in universal values and our capability to source our inner power
and wisdom. Universal values of dignity, equity, and compassion do not
change over time. Technology and systems and cultural norms change.
   When I worked on the project Saving Women’s Lives to reduce maternal
mortality in eight countries of South Asia through UNICEF, we were clear
that the foundation of our work explicitly rested on “the self-determination
and dignity of women, and that this value reflected in each woman’s
realization of her right to a safe, life-enhancing pregnancy and birth.”58 We
had indicators to measure interim outcomes that resulted in saving women’s
lives, such as availability and use of effective emergency hospital services.
We also had culturally appropriate measures of a woman’s self-
determination and dignity as well as her fundamental equity. For example,
in a culture where women have almost no say about financial resources,
could a woman decide to spend even a small amount of money without
asking permission from her husband or mother-in-law?
   As we engaged to reverse the HIV/AIDS epidemic, governments and
United Nations agencies measured wide-ranging aspects: new infections in
people, affordable and equitable access to testing facilities and treatment,
treatment rates and case fatality rates. New infections are often related to
unsafe sex as well as gender-based domination. We tracked whether the
universal values of dignity, equity, and compassion were the basis of
people’s actions. Were people living with HIV/AIDS treated with respect,
and were their voices heard without stigma and discrimination in families,
communities, and health facilities?
   Cynda Rushton, whom we met in Chapter Five, is developing alternative
approaches for cultivating moral resilience in clinicians, since moral
distress is a common experience in their work, and consequently, in their
lives. Cynda has pioneered work regarding embodying universal values in
the context of compassionate care. She reports that using the conscious full-
spectrum process invites a more robust inquiry into the elements necessary
to cultivate and sustain a culture that supports ethical practice as well as
individual, team, and organizational integrity. The CFSR provides a
roadmap for engaging clinicians to leverage their shared values. In each
sphere—individual, team, and organization—it is a process for exploring
the underlying values and inner capacities—the shifts necessary to create
new patterns and the results that are desired.
   The stable foundation of resilience is our moral compass, based on the
universal values of each person. A variety of specific tools and techniques
using the conscious full-spectrum process reduces the intensity of moral
distress, decreases the depth of moral injury, and contributes to healing and
moral repair and ultimately moral resilience. Systematic quality
assessments are undertaken related to policies and practices such as
structures for ethics education and clinical ethics consultation, and policies
governing areas such as conscientious objection and end-of-life care.
   Barbara Torggler has been working at the United Nations as well as
several multicounty organizations for two decades and develops measures
to monitor and evaluate progress toward the overall goal of enhancing
people’s well-being. Barbara says, “I learned to anchor myself in spirit as
the deepest level where we are all united; to take the risk and engage in
large-scale, global, high-level activities that potentially have wide outreach
and large impact. Recent examples of this are the evaluations of standard-
setting work (conventions) of the organization I worked for at the United
Nations, which are being implemented by member states at a global level.”
   The same principle applies to our lives in society and in families—if we
want to accomplish something different, we must design our ideas for
action in a different way, and have different measures. We are on the path of
thriving when we are in touch with who we are, what we stand for, the
universal values underpinning the decisions we make; when we define
prosperity beyond material wants, social status, and extrinsic power; and
when we articulate new measures of success for ourselves, our family
members, and our society.