
 Overcoming Silos and Fragmentation in the
                Workplace
Most managers, leaders, and CEOs want to break down silos and foster
teamwork and synergy. To overcome silos and fragmentation in the
workplace, staff must be able to see how their work contributes to the
organization and how their activities can shape the systems and culture of
their work environment. Using the conscious full-spectrum template is a
powerful way of breaking down silos and fragmentation in the workplace.
   Within and between organizations, coalitions, or any entity, we need
internal and external alignment and attunement.
  Aligning my projects for synergistic outcomes and impact. Most of us
work on more than one project in our workplace. When I revisit project
designs and clearly articulate the systems and cultural shifts based on
universal values, I see the alignment, synergy, interdependence; how
progress in one project affects the others.
   Aligning initiatives within units of a department or entity. In large
organizations, there are departments that employ many people, with each
person designing and implementing several projects. People and their
projects are often organized in units. We can create synergies and greater
impacts and outcomes between the projects by designing and working on
the systems and cultural shifts related to the different specific outputs and
activities of each project. And equally important, we foster teamwork and
effective communication between people in each department because they
explicitly see the interdependence between their projects. This is always
exciting for staff—they can see that they are part of the whole interrelated
system.
   Aligning between departments or entities. Most senior leaders and CEOs
endeavor to break down silos between departments. These silos surface
because the functions of the department and accountabilities of staff are
often perceived as exclusive and based on unique expertise. Funding
mechanisms reinforce the silos and set up competition, particularly where
financial resources are limited. When staff, managers, and leaders in an
entity connect with who they are BEING and what they stand for, they see
the mission and core universal values of the organization beyond the blind
compliance and intellectual understanding of a mission statement—they are
attuned to the universal values and act from that space. And when staff from
different departments work together through a process where they articulate
the systems and cultural shifts they wish to see, they align, create synergies
and far greater impacts and outcomes. Through their activities and
initiatives, they manifest wonderful, creative moments that shift the culture
of silos in real time.
   Aligning between programs and operations. In almost all organizations
and entities, the staff that work on programs (such as livelihoods, health,
education) operate from departments that are different from staff who work
in operations (such as accounting, funding, contracting, human resources).
There is often a sense of “us versus them” resulting in chatter and judgment
about “the other.” Program staff may say, “Senior management, accounting,
human resources, and administration sit in air-conditioned offices and have
no idea of the ground realities and what we do. We are the ones working
with people and have a better idea.” The operations groups may say,
“Program staff and managers get defensive when people in accounting,
human resources, and administration ask questions for clarity and think that
their integrity is being questioned.”
   When program and operations staff, managers, and leaders in an entity
work together in the learning-in-action programs, they discover themselves
and each other in a deeper way, building a new foundation of respect and
appreciation, attuned through resonance with universal values. And when
they articulate the shifts in the systems and culture of the organization
together, they align and create synergies through their actions and
initiatives. The communication between people in operations and programs
is more authentic, a new acknowledgment of the others’ work emerges, and
day-to-day problems are easily resolved.
   Participating in learning-in-action programs and BEING in practice saves
time in the management of an organization because of alignment and
attunement.
   Here is an example of practice leading to alignment and attunement.
Leigh Guerrero is a leader and manager in an organization. She says, “I
inherited staff that were not working together and arguing about the ‘right’
way to accomplish serving our clients. Through individual and team
conversations providing feedback on how to deeply listen to each other, and
how to begin team discussions with the shared universal values of dignity
and equity that underpin the service to our clients and community, staff
were able to see the commitment in their fellow team members and began
to work together to find solutions.”
   Aligning with partners, citizens, and grassroots organizations. No matter
what the theme—ending homelessness, reducing HIV infections, reducing
youth violence, conserving the environment, reducing crime—it is
articulating and acting upon the systems and cultural shifts that provides the
direction and results for equitable and sustainable change. The strategies
and activities may differ with different citizen groups and grassroots
organizations. Even though groups might work in the same community with
the universal values of dignity and equity, their actions can seem disparate.
   Too often we say that there is fragmentation because we see only the
trees and not the forest! Or we say that too many entities or projects are
working on the same issue, duplicating efforts; yet the services and support
mechanisms for those in need remain inadequate. Fragmentation and
duplication are not the problem—the issue is that we often do not know
how to create synergy and resonance. When the public, citizens groups, and
grassroots organizations work together with government, businesses, the
media, and nongovernmental entities through a process in which they
articulate the systems and cultural shifts they wish to see, they align and
create synergies, and greater impacts and outcomes.
  In the different programs through the United Nations—humanitarian
work in conflict areas, environmental issues, addressing HIV/AIDS,
reducing maternal mortality, increasing child survival, realizing human
rights—the role of each agency is different, based on the mandate.
Articulating and acting upon the systems and cultural shifts required with
partners and stakeholders provides the necessary direction for achieving
equitable and sustainable results.
   Robyn McKeen is a manager at the Homeless Services Center in Santa
Cruz County, California. She says, “One of the most significant results of
the three hundred members of our community participating in this program
has been the synergy and relationships that deepened and made our work
more effective.
   “The way we approach formal systems and social norms in the leadership
program is accessible and empowering. Before the program, I felt generally
overwhelmed and powerless in the face of what seemed to be
insurmountable rigid systems perpetuating poverty, inequity, and other
social problems. I have learned to see my project as one of many entry
points into the systems that give rise to the problems we are working to
solve. Now when we participate in the design and implementation of our
projects, leadership program participants look for ways to shift the formal
systems and social norms toward dignity and equity throughout the
process.”
   Kymberly Lacrosse worked on obesity prevention by promoting healthy
eating and active living in Watsonville, California. She spoke up at the
Watsonville City Council meeting when a fast-food company was going to
open a restaurant where new walkways were planned. This was inconsistent
with promoting healthy eating and active living. The residents won the
appeal. And something shifted in the representatives of the fast-food
company—they aligned with what the residents wanted. They decided not
to pursue a lawsuit because they did not want to take resources away from
the community—they saw that the residents were creating a thriving
community.
   In the transformational leadership and stewardship programs, participants
see the alignment and synergy of their work with those of others. It is about
aligning and attuning for results that have the potential to make a paradigm
shift. When we see ourselves as principled game changers, we must be clear
about what we are shifting and must connect every action to what we said
we would shift. This may sound complex, but we align our actions with
what we want to shift and the results we want in our everyday lives—when
I decide to reduce my weight, I eat particular foods and exercise.
  Do we notice and act when societal and political actions are congruent
with universal values and the shifts we want in our families, our
communities, our earth, our well-being? And do we notice and take action
when they are incongruent?


 Fallacy: Once we agree and align with common goals, we will
 automatically transform the whole system and solve problems.
 New Learning: Agreeing to common goals, outcomes, and
 impacts is necessary and aligns us around the “end point.”
 However, unless we shift the systems, structures, and cultural
 norms that give rise to problems, based on universal values, we
 will not achieve the goals in a sustainable manner, and we will
 not accomplish whole-systems transformation.