Axiom 7. Seeing the Missing Piece
Responsible corporate, political, government, media, academic, and
community leaders know what is required for shared prosperity and a
thriving planet and publicly share their views. They can see how corporate
power needs to transform to support governments in order to ensure the
well-being of all people. They see the importance of reducing income
inequality, ending lobbying for policies that exacerbate inequities, paying
workers living wages, sharing the tax burden where the richest companies
and individuals pay more, and investing in universal free education and
health care for societal prosperity. Most often, they do not see the missing
piece: taking into account the immense value of the inner capacity of people
to design strategies and implement change. Some may understand what is
missing intuitively, but do not see how they can systematically draw upon
transformative inner capacities and universal values of everyone—policy-
makers and people at the grass roots alike.
   Social and environmental activists see the invisible forces that create
unworkable systems and the cultural norms that give rise to the many
problems in this world. In the context of the universal values of dignity and
justice, these activists see their role as stopping the injustices that affect
people and the planet. Most often, they do not see the missing piece: taking
into account the immense value of the inner capacity of people to design
strategies and implement change. When activism is anchored in everyone’s
inner capacities, it is compassionate and strong, where principled outrage
replaces destructive anger, where burnout is transformed into sustained
contribution.
   The human potential movement has created deeper societal
conversations. Scholars and teachers invite us to explore our inner lives in a
meaningful way. We are encouraged to take this inner learning and apply it
to our world outside. People may indeed solve problems and contribute to
their communities, families, and workplaces. But the missing piece here is
an explicit commitment to shifting unworkable systems and cultural norms.
Without intentional and proactive efforts to shift the context and rules of the
game that give rise to the problems we see and experience, these efforts
lead to only temporary results. They do not lead us to the essential public
discourses and subsequent action around war and peace, inequity, the
divisive notions of identities, the local, national, global forces of
concentration of wealth in the hands of a few.
   Will we, as corporate, political, media, or government leaders, or think
tanks, have the humility and make the time to invest in our own and others’
learning in order to reverse the current inequities and planetary damage,
generate equitable and sustainable results, and create a paradigm shift? Will
we, as activists, source our and others’ inner capacities, deepen the
responses to challenges, and transform rage and frustration into principled
outrage? Will we, as teachers of the human potential movement, use our
influence to shift dysfunctional systems and cultural norms based on the
universal values of dignity, equity, and compassion?

Axiom 8. Systems Shifts and Root Factors Addressed
Systems change is frequently talked about. It is our recognition of the fact
that systems and cultural norms lie beneath the problems we face and wish
to solve. Although we refer to systems change, few know how to bring this
about in a simple and consistent way. Yet this work offers both meaning and
a methodology—it combines human greatness with systems thinking and
concrete solutions.
  This is a design r-evolution—a paradigm shift through radical
evolutionary design.
   It is not enough to understand the factors and forces that create and
legitimize the systems and norms that inhibit progress. We must actively
design our work to shift these structures, systems, and cultural norms. And
we must know how to address the root factors of the challenges we face.
   The entangled hierarchies that lead to complex problems require us to
address the full spectrum consciously. Most people are overwhelmed when
they think of shifting unworkable systems and cultural norms—working
with the multiple, nonlinear, interdependent factors appears far too
complicated! However, with a few design and operating principles and
templates, our response can be simple and not simplistic!
   In today’s turbulent and complex times we have no choice but to navigate
in the different spheres where we engage. Three interrelated systems
spheres—societal norms, formal governance, and our workplace—require
us to source our inner capacities to deal with the root factors of
dysfunctional systems, bringing about the changes we wish to see.
   We also operate in the context of societal, religious, and family norms.
Often, challenging unfair practices is hardest with those closest to us. We
described some of the threats to human beings and our planet, and a few
critical contributing factors to this plight, in the chapter on challenges and
our commitment to transform them. The stakes are high.
   Am I seizing opportunities to make a difference in my work, whether in a
corporation, a government or nongovernmental organization, the media,
think tanks, or academia, or as a self-employed person? Am I leveraging
change in governance and political spheres as a concerned citizen? Every
situation, no matter how difficult, presents opportunities. Am I acting upon
them?
Axiom 9. Sophisticated Simplicity: Dealing with Complexity
The environment within which human development and a thriving planet
may occur is growing increasingly more complex. The pace of change has
accelerated, and there is a greater frequency of reforming and restructuring.
The consequences of error, oversight, misinformation, and miscalculation
are far-reaching and come swiftly. So are the consequences of positive and
skillful action. With the immense advances in technology and connectivity,
life-enhancing strategies and actions move results more rapidly.
   Globalization, digitization, demographic shifts, and rapid environmental
degradation are all creating waves of change requiring us to understand
development challenges differently—and respond accordingly. Human
development, or the lack thereof, relates to complex social phenomena
within which we are called to help unleash the resources we have in service
of all peoples. The persistent manifestations of poverty, high mortality,
hunger, conflict, war, and exploitation are symptoms of social dysfunction
and deeper-lying cultural forces.
   Once we understand this, it becomes more readily clear why these
development problems persist. What steps will you take to ensure that our
technology and other resources address these issues successfully at home, in
society, and at work, and as soon as possible?