Axiom 3. Principled Game-Changing Made Possible
This is where we see our universal values in action, when individuals and
leaders from every sphere of life step up to generate a thriving humanity.
   Shifting our political economies and financial instruments to serve the
well-being of humanity, to create peace and prosperity worldwide, rather
than financing war, ill health, and environmental destruction, is imperative.
Instruments designed to concentrate wealth in the hands of a few are
unacceptable. This is being stated by millions of people all over the world.
Though many people may feel these forces are insurmountable, we know
that when people source equity and compassion, they act courageously and
create alternatives. Outrageous decisions and behind-the-scenes
negotiations with dire consequences for humanity and our planet are made
by only a handful of people. Many others follow these “rules of the game”
blindly or mindlessly; or because the rules are explained and understood in
the context of some self-serving theory; or they are given a partial view and
therefore do not understand the repercussions of what they are being asked
to do.
  Shifting the all-pervasive mindsets that underpin these life-diminishing
political, economic, and financial policies and instruments seems
impossible. We are educated and socialized to believe in a social, economic,
and political order that is based on domination and does not work for the
majority of humanity. We live in a scientific, Cartesian world, where
economics, science, and technology are often used as smoke screens for the
politics of the elite. Elites have captured democratic policy-making so as to
benefit the few instead of the many. Today, the value and essence of
democracy has been lost. Principled game-changing is about reclaiming
democracy and citizenship in an entirely new way, embodying universal
values to change the game. To make the best use of the great technologies
we have at hand, we need to reclaim the wisdom of the human spirit and
learn how to ask fundamental questions.
   Here are a couple of examples of smoke screens. A wealthy group in
India publicized their intention to build a hospital—an activity that appeals
to people. Their request to obtain free government land in a prime location
was approved because they committed to have 25 percent of the hospital
beds and services for patients who could not afford to pay. They even
received a grant for the same. The hospital was built, and 75 percent of the
beds and services were only for those who paid high costs—the remaining
25 percent of the beds remain “under construction.” People worldwide want
adequate infrastructure, such as roads, water, and sanitation systems.
Schemes that privatize public assets, such as roads and infrastructure,
deceive taxpayers, decrease revenue for government, and allow only a few
wealthy people to continue to accrue money.70
   It is essential that citizens and leaders understand both the visible and
hidden sources of action and inaction, and the attitudes that determine these.
We must make the effort to understand the different smoke screens, and
responsible experts who care need to demystify the language used in
shaping economic policies and financial instruments.
   Worldviews generated from universal principles of dignity and equity are
different from the ideological perspectives based on a theory. When we
source our inner capacities and understand the rules of the game, we are
willing to alter our points of view and can steer decisions toward dignity
and equity.
   Are you a citizen and leader who is open and willing to cultivate your
own value-based worldviews through inquiry and insights? Will you create
spaces for authentic value-based exploration and dialogue in order to make
principled game-changing the norm? Can we genuinely value leaders and
citizens who are principled game changers instead of mindlessly supporting
ideological stances just because our social identity is wrapped up with
them?
Axiom 4. The Ism Interrupter
Although what we all want as human beings is the same deep down—
happiness, to love and be loved, to belong—and we all experience joy,
grief, anger, and remorse, our socialization and education processes
influence us through life. Some are life-enhancing, and others are
dominating, divisive, and detrimental for humanity. We must be able to
transcend the numerous socially constructed detrimental isms—racism,
casteism, classism, tribalism, exclusionary religiosity, sexism—based on
assumptions and conditioning that we receive from our family, religion,
politics, education, and culture, which lead to unending social turmoil,
retaliation, violence, and destruction of cultures, people, and the planet.
  How do we interrupt the centuries of isms? How can we rediscover who
we are as human BEINGS beyond race, gender, caste, tribe, and class, while
honoring diversity and celebrating difference?
   Radical transformation sources our inner capacities and universal values
as the basis of strategic action; it is the ism interrupter. Radical
transformation moves us beyond hegemony and patriarchy and creates new
social and professional patterns of equity, recognizing our essential human
oneness. Grounding our work, projects, relations, and daily tasks in our
deepest values, we learn to nurture and listen and to give and sustain life
while at the same time being effective, efficient, and results-focused. We
see that creation is available to us in our hearts, minds, and hands—we
allow them to work together, and we start molding reality from our deepest
dreams of dignity, justice, equity, and peace.
   This does not mean that we do not call out what is exploitative or
undermining. Radical transformation implies that we have the courage to
speak truth to power; and when we work on specific issues, such as racism,
casteism, or classism, or on specific themes, such as Black Lives Matter,
clean energy, living wages and decent jobs, or universal free education, we
do so beyond an “us versus them” strategy. We source universal values,
always knowing that anyone could at any time unpredictably unfold and
manifest their greatness.
   As citizens and leaders, when we commit to a thriving humanity, we have
the responsibility to shift the current narratives that maintain the status quo.
For example, when anyone makes a statement on dignity and equity for all,
they are often branded as “left.” However, there is nothing “left” or “right”
about humanity’s mindless march downhill. It is about waking up to
realities and our patterns of unbridled consumption eroding our planet and
the lives of other people. It is the ability to look at a phenomenon beyond
ideologies of capitalism, socialism, and communism, to transcend the isms,
grounded in our universal values of dignity, equity, and compassion.
  Are you willing to interrupt these isms in a fundamentally new way?
Otherwise, our “otherness” and exclusionary mindsets will result in another
expression of the same domination—the next version of Jim Crow! Can the
next generation count on you and me to generate the conditions for peaceful
and prosperous societies?

Axiom 5. The Radical Superhero Is Here
The new superheroes are here—you met some of them in this book, and
perhaps you see yourself in them too. They are largely unnoticed—just
emerging. They are contemporary pioneers, investing in their own inner
(not necessarily religious) growth, sourcing their inner capacities to
transform the world. They proactively inform themselves about the state of
the world and about their community and society; they see patterns behind
what is happening—they see the connections in seemingly disconnected
events; and they design the unifying and radical architecture for equitable
and sustainable results.
   They have the courage to take on difficult issues and solve problems;
they act from a source of wisdom, compassion, and empathy, rather than
charity and “doing good.” They do not reflect the traditional sage aloof
from the world; or the superhero characters who rush to save people in
desperate situations and are brave in the face of death. They are instead
informed sages, wise in the ways of the world, and they are here to
contribute. They are courageous architects of new futures. They do not need
to be the star of the show; rather, they midwife the ideas and aspirations of
people, bringing into existence the prosperity fractal with conscious full-
spectrum responses.
  Ethical citizenship and leadership are not idealist—they are realistic and
must be normalized. They lead the way with the mindset of abundance, not
scarcity; sufficiency, not greed; peace, not war.
   Today’s radical superheroes are the radical transformational leaders
throughout the world, grateful to be able to serve. How can the creativity
and commitment of eminent film producers and writers be stimulated to see
and share the excitement and unfolding of this next generation of
superheroes? Will Hollywood and Bollywood step up to the challenge of
featuring the new superheroes and changing the societal narratives? Will
concerned and visionary artists, musicians, and performers create the
thrilling new narratives of prosperity and success through the stories of
emerging radical superheroes? Will citizens and media see and highlight the
courageous, compassionate, and equitable actions and create new social
trends for responsible leadership to emerge?

Axiom 6. Untapped Potential Unfolds
There are millions of people engaged in solving social, environmental, and
business problems. It’s admirable to have a vision of new futures,
something good that we want to achieve in the world or in our own lives.
But visions fail when they are bound up in the force of a charismatic
personality and not grounded in the wisdom of universal values. Wisdom is
often missing in modern leadership. Leading from this inner capacity will
tap into the power to deliver sustainable results. To tackle intractable
problems, leaders must address the root factors and mull over the strategic
leverage points that bring the most promising shifts in societal behavior.
Technical fixes don’t work. It is about creating value-based alternatives.
   You have met creative, committed, and effective leaders in this book and
elsewhere generating transformative results. This is the new potential
unfolding.
  And there are millions of people in the world today who genuinely want
peace and prosperity. If only we could all decide to embark on our unique
journeys to manifest our full potential and create platforms for others to do
so too, we would be on the path to a sustainable paradigm shift.
  Environmentalist and author Paul Hawken estimates that there are two
million organizations working toward social justice and ecological
sustainability.71 Clearly, these committed people care deeply enough to give
up other opportunities and have chosen to serve. What if the leaders of these
organizations were willing to shift from partial responses to conscious full-
spectrum responses, each in their own unique way? Renew their
organizations to work as unique yet resonant entities in interdependent
constellations? Entities in which each person solves problems, creates new
patterns changing the rules of the game, sources inner capacities related to
our oneness. Our impact would be huge!
   Cooperatives with democratic ownership and governance are emerging as
a powerful global economic influence. Individuals in these cooperatives
have chosen to engage in business differently, valuing the contribution of
each member, moving from a competitive, scarcity mindset to shared
leadership. In 2014, 2.6 million cooperatives had over one billion
memberships and clients. Cooperatives are low-profile. The annual revenue
generated by cooperatives around the world is $2.98 trillion. If they were
national economies, they would rank as the fifth in the world.72 What if
each one of these cooperatives invested in learning to source inner
capacities and designed for enduring and just change? The era of ethical
business would manifest!
   Many leadership programs are skillful in personal development, team
building, and enhancing the performance of individuals within
organizations. However, these courses are integrated firmly in current
notions of growth, economic thinking, market forces, and corporate
policies. Rarely do leadership programs focus on the key component that
leads to equitable and sustainable results for society—shifts in unworkable
systems and norms. In the United States alone, investment in leadership
education and development approached $50 billion in 2000, and it has
grown considerably. More than 20,000 books and thousands of articles have
been written about essential aspects of leadership and its results.73 If the
thousands of leadership consultants and teachers committed to a thriving
humanity and planet, and worked on transforming unworkable systems and
norms when they deliver leadership programs, there would potentially be a
tremendous outcome and impact for people and for our planet.
  For the first time ever, world leaders pledged to common action for a
universal policy agenda for our planet and people throughout the entire
world and to strengthen universal peace and in all developing and
developed countries. In September 2015, world leaders from 193 countries
announced 17 Sustainable Development Goals related to social, economic,
and environmental progress. They said, “We envisage a world free of
poverty, hunger, disease and want, where all life can thrive. We envisage a
world free of fear and violence. We envisage a world of universal respect
for human rights and human dignity. As we embark on this great collective
journey, we pledge that no one will be left behind.”74
   Will you proactively advocate for the Sustainable Development Goals?
Will you capitalize on the unprecedented agreement by all countries of the
Sustainable Development Goals with a conscious full-spectrum approach
and generate a paradigm shift locally and globally? We could establish
equity, well-being, peace, progress, prosperity, and a thriving humanity and
planet. It is critical to ensure that the universal values of dignity, equity, and
inclusion form the basis of all strategic action and progress. Otherwise, new
expressions of inequalities, erosion of dignity, poverties, and
disempowering power play will emerge, and we will not be able to achieve
the goals.
   How can we hold institutions and different sectors—politicians,
government, businesses, civil society—accountable for humanity’s
progress? In what way do I want to hold myself responsible and contribute
to a new future? We are poised to generate the tipping point for a new
paradigm to emerge!