
       Leaders in Politics Generating New Narratives
Political leaders play a crucial role in enhancing the quality of life of
citizens, empowering people to articulate their interests and views and bring
about social transformation. It is imperative that we change the current
narrative that “leaders must be pragmatic because leadership based on
universal values is too idealistic”! A new understanding is emerging:
leadership based on universal values is essential for the well-being and
prosperity of people and the planet. Ethical leaders are radical systems and
cultural transformers.
   Ehab El Kharrat, whom you met in Chapter Six, through sourcing what
he stands for, transcends narrow social identities in service of humanity and
creates opportunities for others to manifest their greatness.
   In Egypt, Ehab El Kharrat continues to apply these approaches to
politics: he is committed to an alternative system where dignity and justice
prevail. He engaged in the two waves of the Egyptian revolution, and was
one of the five founders of the largest post-revolution party—the Egyptian
Social Democratic Party. He was elected its supreme council secretary. He
ran for parliament and won a seat to represent East and North Cairo; he was
chosen, even by his political rivals, to be the head of the Human Rights
Committee of the Shura Council (equivalent to the U.S. Senate); he was
also a member of the first drafting committee of the new constitution.
However, Ehab resigned as a member in protest of the committee’s
exclusionary and autocratic approach, and went on and used his personal
and partisan influence to write the current 2014 Egyptian constitution.
   Ehab shares his journey as a political leader changing the social and
political discourse in Egypt: “In building up the Egyptian Social
Democratic Party (ESDP) I shared my insights, directly and indirectly, with
the other leaders. I effectively led a ‘revolutionary’ council comprising two
hundred men and women from different backgrounds. I facilitated
generative conversations based on universal values of dignity and equity,
using the many tools I learned during my work with the program to reverse
the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Sourcing ‘our oneness’ enabled me to build
bridges between rivals and opponents, the revolutionaries (rioters) and the
police, Islamists and secularists—all sides trusted me in many instances.
Although I am a Christian and a liberal, the extreme right-wing Muslim
fundamentalists were able to relate and communicate with me, at least most
of the time.
   “For example, in the opening session of the Senate (Shura), the majority
were Islamists. Every time an idea was proposed, the extreme ones (the
Salafists) insisted on adding ‘only if it does not contradict Shar3 Allah (the
law of God),’ which was a violation of the protocol. The atmosphere was
electrified and tense. Throughout, I looked for ‘our oneness’ behind the
Salafists’ words. After a brief introduction I said, ‘We too, as liberals, are
committed to work without violating Shar3 Allah, because we understand
the law of God as the principles of justice, freedom, dignity to all, equity,
and peace.’ The whole crowd cheered, and a sense of relief replaced the
tension of the first session of parliament.
   “Months later, both the Brotherhood and the Salafists were less happy
with me and my words. We as opposition leaders were threatened by
extremists. This was a reaction to some passionate youth who supported our
ideals, threatening that if anyone touches secular and liberal leaders, they
would make him pay. Hearing this I assumed I was one of the intended
leaders, and I gave a public call in the parliament, declaring that I am ready
to be killed but not ready for anyone to use violence to protect me. I called
for the liberal and secular youth to stick to nonviolence. Then I invited my
Islamist colleagues to give a similar call. Shouts of protest came out of the
majority seats, some denying that they ever use violence and others
threatening, ‘You have not seen our violence yet.’ I was prevented from
finishing my talk!
  “This does not deter me. Bringing up these issues is vital to change
societal conversations.
   “The Islamists were not happy with me when I suggested that Buddhists,
Hindus, and all people from all religions should be allowed, by constitution,
to build their temples and places of worship in Egypt. This move was
rejected, and the constitution still forbids that, but a video of me on
YouTube defending this position against a veiled lady defending the
opposite point of view had twelve thousand viewers; 95 percent of those
supported my view. The culture, at least on Facebook and YouTube, is
shifting, but in public, maybe most people are afraid to speak.
   “The way to democracy is here, but there is still a long way to go.
Hundreds of thousands are shifting to a higher level of commitment to
human rights. The current constitution articulates social and economic
rights, but the road to transforming those constitutional articles to laws and
policies which are applied is still a narrow and hard path. We are currently
working with an NGO and a number of innovative campaigns to continue
the peaceful journey toward equal rights for all.”
  Ehab strives to generate a world that works for everyone, beyond social
divisions and the quest for external power and control.
  Another inspiring example from the political sphere: Mel Wymore,
executive director of TransPAC, an organization that is committed to full
and equal rights for transgender people. Mel stands for empowerment and
inclusion for everyone, and he participated in a series of learning-in-action
programs.
   Mel ran for office as a natural progression of his work in his community,
which has always been a central part of his life. Mel designed his campaign
for New York City Council as a conscious full-spectrum project. He
identified what he stood for, the systems and cultural norms he wanted to
shift, and the measurable results he wanted to achieve. Mel and his team
developed core principles that were reflected in all of their messaging and
campaign activities. Running a principle-based campaign started to shift the
narrative around local politics.
   “I feel that was a major contribution,” he says. “First, the simple shift
from running a political campaign by design rather than by reaction,
identifying the systems involved and how we might change those systems
to create fairer and more transparent representation, generated new
conversations locally. Secondly, the norms in local politics involve
patronage and political trade-offs. We broke out of those norms by focusing
our work and messaging on principles.”
  The principles were inclusion and empowering of all people; an
invitation to participate; campaign money raised from committed
individuals only—no corporate funds; no quid pro quo compromises;
ongoing contribution, adding value to the community during the campaign;
democratic engagement. One of their core principles was inclusivity. “We
had volunteers from six to ninety years old, people of all abilities, races,
and economic backgrounds. We had three homeless people on staff.”
  In their reporting, the media referred to the core principles and systems
Mel and his team were shifting. Community contributed during the
campaign: they created awareness and raised funds for a local park; created
environmental action forums; had housing placement for homeless
constituents; reached out to food and health programs for their community;
and advocated for traffic safety and vehicle-free zones.
   Mel says, “I learned that it’s possible to ‘jump into the void’ every day, to
take on new challenges without knowing all the answers first. I learned that
I have the power to inspire people, especially when I speak from my heart. I
learned that I can rely on people to take responsibility, but that I need to
communicate clearly about expectations and accountability.
   “I came to understand that everything I do or say is an opportunity to
bring awareness and shift the systems and cultural norms that adversely
affect our society and its people. The trick is to identify the leverage points
at which individual actions affect larger forces. For example, whenever I
got a chance to speak to the media, I talked about principles and system
shifts. Whenever an issue came up in the community, I spoke about it in a
larger context, to bring light to underlying factors rather than immediate
reactions. I also did this whenever I spoke to campaign volunteers and staff.
I wanted to expand consciousness about systems and cultural norms in
every dimension of the campaign.


 Fallacy: Politicians have to do what is pragmatic. People are
 interested in their immediate needs being met—they are not
 interested is what is causing problems. They are too busy coping
 with their everyday lives. To win the votes, politicians have to
 “play to the gallery.”
 New Learning: Politicians can be leaders and stewards who are
 pragmatic and responsible and operate from universal values to
 create a thriving future. They understand that the primary
 purpose of a political campaign, at its best, is to transform the
 political discourse for citizens to generate a prosperous,
 equitable, and enduring future and mature the democratic
 process.
 Citizens want to know, and are fully capable of understanding,
 the systems and cultural norms that give rise to problems in
 everyday living as well as those that erode our dignity and
 capabilities from manifesting. Citizens want to engage in making
 their lives, and the lives of the next generation, better.


   “I always think of context, and I always consider ways to design rather
than react. It’s not always easy to see hidden systems or identify appropriate
points of leverage, but it is usually possible to bring this consciousness to
almost any endeavor.
  “We must develop our ability to create and care about our larger selves.
The tools you offer—connecting to my inner capacities and universal
values, identifying and shifting systems, articulating measurable results—
have been invaluable to me in pursuing that goal.
   “After years of confusion and turmoil, I finally uncovered my desire to
transition to a more masculine expression of gender. At that time, I was
ready to dedicate my life’s work to changing the world’s notion of gender,
to ‘save’ all those oppressed by gender norms. In conversations with you,
however, I came to understand how focusing my attention solely on gender
would limit my capacity to create change. Gender is but one system that
boxes us up and creates us as ‘other.’ I have grown beyond my own
circumstances to serve a greater good.”
  Mel’s campaign changed the discourse—people talked about the systems
and cultural norms they wanted to shift, and they simultaneously worked
during the campaign for their community.
   Another example is Moustapha Gueye, who was a member of our team to
address the global HIV/AIDS epidemic at the United Nations Development
Programme. After Moustapha left the United Nations, he applied some of
the same praxis to politics and human development. Moustapha was elected
as the mayor of Sokone, Senegal, where he is changing the public
discourses and narratives through the media, emphasizing the need for
political engagement of both politicians and citizens, based on universal
values of dignity and equity.
  Changing the narratives around politics is crucial. To generate a thriving
and prosperous future, people must understand that temporary Band-Aid
solutions will not work; it is imperative for people to make the effort to
understand the systems and cultural norms giving rise to today’s problems
and the problems the next generation will face, and ensure that universal
values underpin the policies and strategies we formulate.
  Making the invisible rules of the game and their consequences visible is a
concrete step toward changing the narratives. Demystifying technical jargon
and the web of rules and regulations that lead to disparity in a world of
abundance is essential for people to participate fully, instead of engaging as
token participants.
  As citizens, we have a crucial role in transforming the narratives that
maintain the disempowering status quo.

   As citizens, we know the difference between information that promotes
   consumerism and information that promotes our well-being and the
   well-being of our family, society, and earth; we make informed
   decisions, based on universal values of dignity, equity, compassion.
   We have the responsibility to learn to differentiate between political
   communication that is built on rhetoric and false statements “to protect
   people” that lead to short-term financial benefits, violence, exclusion,
   hatred, and otherness; and authentic communication that is built on
   universal values for the prosperity and well-being of all people.
   We consistently make the effort to check the reliability of the different
   sources of information, their affiliations, and their possible vested
   interests; we use information with discernment.
   We always consider the consequences of our words, our decisions, and
   our actions on the well-being of the next generations.

   We create new narratives for a thriving future by sharing what inspires
us. We are explicit about the universal values that underpin the story as well
as the systems and cultural norms that are being shifted. We discuss the
equitable and enduring results being generated through new narratives.