          Manifesting Wholeness: Integrity
Earlier in this chapter we discussed the joy of being in action and noted that
transformative design templates and mindful response praxes are in sync.
We use the conscious full-spectrum response (CFSR) template for
implementation—the integrity lens is one example.
   Integrity means “BEING whole.” It is based on our evolutionary impulse
to be whole, undiminished. The terms morality, ethics, and integrity are
often used synonymously, but in our work we distinguish them. Peter
Singer, a bioethical philosopher, uses ethics and morality interchangeably.45
In common parlance, morality relates to individual, value-based conduct in
society. But it can sometimes become a space of judging and ostracizing
people, promoted by exclusionary religiosity. Ethics is understood as a set
of value-based principles operating in society. In our work, ethical
leadership specifically refers to the ability of a leader to act from the
universal values of dignity, fairness, and compassion for all, and transcend
cultural expressions and differences.
   The integrity lens is a process of inquiry into what it means to be whole,
rather than a process to assess, monitor, or evaluate whether we are on
track. Such processes have their place, and we will explore them in Chapter
Ten.
   I have found it essential for me and the teams I work with to have
nonjudgmental spaces to inquire, reflect, notice, be mindful as we are in
action, neither elated nor defensive. I have formulated six questions for
inquiry coherent with the architecture of the conscious full-spectrum
response and have used them at varying levels in different cultures and
settings. It is an inquiry to notice gaps, without blaming or feeling
inadequate or guilty because of not completing activities. This reduces the
defensiveness we often face at home and at work. And since we are pulled
to be whole, it works! It always generates new perspectives, strategies, and
actions, in both personal and professional lives.
   The six inquiries illustrated in Figure 7-1 are an indivisible value-based
set, and are articulated below.
                    Figure 7-1 . The Integrity Lens and Six Inquiries.

  Two inquiries relate to the inner circle of CFSR. These inquiries initiate
action toward equitable and enduring results.

  1. I do what I say. I am my word, and I take my word seriously, in the
     numerous minor and major decisions I make day-to-day. Not “you do
     what I say”! Family, friends, and colleagues know that they can count
     on me to honor my agreements with them. When I engage with others,
     each person notices when there are gaps between what I do and what I
     say. This allows me to move forward with clarity. There are articles on
     how crucial it is for leaders and managers to “honor their word.”46
     However, most of these articles position “I am my word” as a stand-
     alone point. As crucial as “I am my word” is, without universal values
     underpinning my word and without inquiring into the equitable
     strategic implications of “I am my word,” I may fall into a totally
     misguided trap. Take an extreme example, just to make this point—was
     Hitler not his word? He delivered on what he planned, inflicting
     horrific, excruciating torture and death upon Jews and other people he
     considered inferior.
  2. I deliver on my action plans. When I deliver on what I plan, I renew
     myself in spaces of completion with quiet joy, feeling accomplished. It
     is not about resolution to finish tasks—it is about inquiry so that I
     notice the gaps in my progress and choose to narrow them. Are there
     gaps in some areas of my engagements? What am I doing or not doing
     that derails my intentions and actions? Has the context of my family
     life, community, or work changed? Did I make assumptions that need
     to be changed? Members of our team found it increasingly easy to
     notice and simply state “I was out of integrity,” without feeling guilty,
     judging or blaming themselves and others, or being defensive. They
     simply noticed mindfully.

  Two inquiries relate to the middle circle of CFSR regarding what we
need to shift in norms and systems to make our actions and results equitable
and enduring.

  3. I establish congruence between strategies and actions and universal
     values and principles. It is practical and essential to reflect on this as
     we design and implement our programs or ideas. We can shift norms
     and systems to generate equitable and enduring futures if we choose to
     —after all, we humans created these structures and patterns. For this
     future to emerge, strategies and actions must emanate from the
     universal values of dignity, fairness, compassion for all. This is perhaps
     the weakest component of human endeavors in our world today, in
     which vested interests and personal agendas are at the core,
     maintaining the status quo and unworkable systems. Why strain every
     day on life’s treadmill, running tirelessly in the rat race, when it is
     possible to change the rules of the games we play by?
  4. I speak up and speak out for what I stand for. By speaking up and
     speaking out based on what we stand for, we can shift the norms and
     systems that give rise to problems and create new contexts for cultures
     to thrive. It is possible for the vast majority of human beings to
     reorganize their lives so that all of humanity can thrive through our
     conversations at home, at work, and in society.

  Two inquiries relate to the outer circle of CFSR and are related to how
we can generate actions for equitable and enduring results and radically
shift the paradigm.

  5. I am the change I wish to see—I am the shift. This is a personal
     inquiry and reflection. I notice when I am BEING the change I wish to
     see. I am on a lifelong journey of enhancing my inner capacities. When
     I share the insights I generate from my personal practice it creates a
     space for authentic and inspiring communication. Knowing the
     inherent propensity in humans to evolve to wholeness and integrity, my
     inquiry is to discern and see things as they are with an open heart. I
     must still the chatter in my mind.
  6. I have the courage to create. I inquire and notice when my
     compassionate heart does not allow me to simply sit apathetically on
     the fence and watch the pain of other people and our planet without
     responding. I notice and share with others, even when there are
     objections or in the face of no agreement.

   Here are some examples of BEING and manifesting integrity, where
there is a synthesis of our reflections based all the six inquiries.
   Mike, the chief of human resources in a multinational company, was a
participant in the leadership program at the University of Notre Dame’s
Mendoza College of Business. He was expected to downsize the company
—that was the project he worked on during the learning-in-action program.
He inquired and reflected: “I stand for compassion and dignity; how will I
accomplish this task?” Letting several thousand people go was not
congruent with his values. He noticed this gap, and standing in the ground
of his BEING with compassion and courage, he opened new avenues for
action and created an alternative. He worked relentlessly with different
managers in the company to find out what they needed; he retooled the
jobs. He decided to shift the norms and knew how to navigate the system.
He constantly spoke up and inspired others to think differently. He created a
win-win-win situation—instead of losing their jobs, employees moved on to
other responsibilities; the company’s needs were met; and Mike was in
integrity and at peace with himself.
 Fallacy: Integrity is for idealists. We must be practical and do
 what needs to be done; we have no choice because the systems
 are so big and society’s pressures are so formidable. Therefore,
 we have to compromise on universal values if we want to
 produce results.
 New Learning: Integrity is based on our inherent evolutionary
 call to be whole. When we take a stand because of who we are,
 new solutions and pathways open up aligned with our universal
 values. As we practice, we cultivate this aspect of ourselves, and
 we are able to unleash our full potential as we respond.


   There is something very powerful in moving beyond the right-wrong
judgments and beyond the blame games we play. It is liberating to
transcend sending ourselves or others on guilt trips because something is
not working; transcend our tendencies to blindly defend cultural identities
that are divisive and promoting harmful norms; and question norms in
variance with universal values.
  We can all use the integrity lens with the six inquiries in our work, at
home, and in society.

   Did I do what I said?
   Did I deliver on what I planned to do?
   Are my actions congruent with my universal values?
   Did I speak up and speak out based on what I stand for?
   Am I the change I wish to see? In other words, do I walk my talk?
   Did I have the courage to create?

  We can try this—it is very liberating to release defensiveness, notice
gaps, and create openings for new realities to emerge.
          Communicating with Awareness
When I am self-aware, my communication generates transformational
spaces and unfolds new possibilities and ways of BEING through
mindfulness and action. There are distinctive communication and personal
development methodologies, and most management and leadership
programs have a set of communication tools in their repertoire. Here are a
few of the communication praxes we use in our work. All these tools can be
used to manage our day-to-day engagement as we are leading change and
stewarding our resources.
       Cultivating Personal Resilience for Self-Aware
                      Communication
Self-awareness is critical for effective and transformational communication.
Some of us choose to embark on a lifelong journey to realize our full
potential, strive to notice our triggers, lighten our psychological “hang-
ups,” and “clean up” some of the mess we are in.
   Three particular concerns surface repeatedly when we move forward as
principled game changers: we face ridicule, insults, and obstruction. Other
people feel threatened and become defensive. The key questions are, How
do we build resilience without harboring resentments or feeling diminished?
How do we continue to be open to learning from others without being “shut
up and shut down”?
  When someone ridicules, sneers, insults, or intentionally marginalizes
me, I use a few praxes that work for me, and I have noticed they work for
other practitioners too:

   Don’t take what is being said or written personally: it is not about you
   or me; it is about the other person’s judgmental way. Don’t take ridicule,
   insults, and criticism personally.
   Be assertive, not submissive or aggressive, speaking from what you
   stand for. In most cultures, when women are assertive, they are labeled
   as aggressive; when men are assertive, and not aggressive, they are
   labeled as weak, and called names like “sissy.”
   Be prepared to be “put down” by others, but never “get down” or “feel
   down.”
   Expect to face resistance—most people are afraid of change even when
   they hate the circumstances they are in.
   Listen. Be willing to change and express your point of view based on
   universal values.

   We must stand firmly in the ground of our universal values even in the
face of no agreement. This is not easy, but it is vital. In spite of how tactical
we may be, whenever we stretch to create changes, there are always people
in the organization, bureaucracy, community, society, or family who want to
put us down. Resistance is, in fact, an indicator that we are pushing for
change, and making a difference.
   We must cultivate the ability not to take things personally. During
meditation retreats, Vipassana meditation teacher S. N. Goenka shares a
story about the Buddha. The Buddha was teaching at a gathering of
thousands of people; the priests were upset because their hold on people
was becoming weak—people were rediscovering who they were and
sourcing their inner capacities for action. The priests sent a woman to the
gathering, who pretended to be pregnant with Buddha’s child, shouting and
hurling insults at him. The Buddha responded, “You know the truth; I do
not wish to accept this gift of insults from you.” This example has helped
me tremendously. You and I never have to accept such “gifts” either!
 Fallacy: In every culture and setting, we need to have ways of
 forcing “boundaries.” When people don’t listen to reason, the only
 way to manage them is through fear, or control through
 appropriate ridicule and insults. Only then will they comply, and
 this is normal in every culture. And since I am not an important
 person, I have to comply.
 New Learning: Irrespective of my social status, my material
 resources, or my place in an organizational hierarchy, I am equal
 as a human BEING. When I am resilient and I do not diminish
 myself, I unfold my full potential. Others cannot diminish me,
 even if their intention is to do so.