Stage 1                                     Stage 2

    Personal transformational                    Capacity development and
    stewardship or leadership                    utilization
    development                                  Measurement and new metrics
    Information for decision-                    New narratives generating new
    making
                                                 systems and cultural norms for a
    An enabling environment for                  paradigm shift
    change
                                                 Organization of constellations that
    Support for principled risk-                 are interdependent and shift the
    takers                                       paradigm


  These four additional operational strategies are depicted in Figure 10-1
and described with examples below.
                Figure 10-1 . Synergistic Operational Strategies—Stage 2.


   Capacity Development for Transformative
                   Results
Our quality of life and well-being depend on much more than having
material wealth and comfort. When our universal values are attuned with
how we think and what we do, a deep subjective sense of well-being is
established, anchored in contentment and compassionate action, unleashing
our full potential. In the broadest picture, our quality of life includes the
notion of capabilities—our health, our literacy, and our capacity to actively
participate in social and political spheres and pursue what we deeply care
about. This rejects the view held by some that human beings act primarily
out of self-interest. But opportunities must be made available for people to
express these literacies and capacities within society.
  Capacity development is the process by which people, organizations, and
society as a whole unleash, strengthen, create, adapt, and maintain capacity
over time. Capacity development addresses three dimensions: human,
organizational, and broader institutional capacity.
   To have people-centered capacity development, we need to be clear: what
do we develop capacity for? We need development of technological
capacity to solve problems, along with competencies for management,
formulating policies, and making decisions that are equitable and
sustainable. Capacity needs to be developed for leaders and stewards to take
action for systems and cultural shifts based on universal values.
   A conscious full-spectrum approach is useful for building capacities of
institutions as well as individuals. It can unleash entrepreneurship that
builds on deeply embedded traditions of voluntary and mutual aid and self-
help forms of social capital without generating more debt. And applying
this deeper understanding of capacity development can generate entirely
new perspectives and responses to governance and current financial and
economic systems. For example, in the area of trade, the CFSR approach
assists people in developing human and institutional capacities based on
universal values for formulating new policies, effective negotiations, and
informed participation based on equity and sustainability. Developing
countries can then also reap maximum benefits, instead of having to cope
on the uneven playing field of today’s multilateral trading system.
  Using the conscious full-spectrum approach we relate capacity
development to human potential and inner capabilities, whereby self-
awareness, self-expression, self-management, responsibility, and
accountability are enhanced. Figure 10-2 shows what capabilities and
competencies we foster for equitable and sustainable change.
  At home, we can choose to follow a similar pattern for ourselves and our
children. We can develop skills and mastery in a professional craft; the
necessary competencies to effectively navigate the many family, societal,
and workplace pressures; and the capacity to live life fully and mindfully,
cultivating self-awareness along with the joy of being creative.
   In order to take work to scale, a core strategy for continued and sustained
changes and results is to develop capacity. Equally important are strategies
for utilizing capacity. Too often people are trained, but it is others who get
the jobs—a particular group of people, or familiar people we want to
promote. Capacity development and creating opportunities to use this
capacity are core components of all programs we design and implement




                 Figure 10-2 . Capacity Development for Results.

 Fallacy: Developing leadership competencies is very important
 for change, particularly for those who hold senior management
 and leadership positions in their organizations.
 New Learning: Everyone can, and must, develop leadership and
 stewardship capacities, and apply them at home, in communities,
 and at work, in order to generate systems and cultural shifts for
 people and our planet to thrive.