  The transformational speaking frame is a generative template for us to
speak up and speak out, and it is congruent with the CFSR approach.
Distinguishing four ways by which we can communicate and speak gives us
choices.
  Marketing is promoting or selling products or services, even ideas.
  Advocacy is publicly supporting or recommending a particular cause or
policy. These are usually based on the universal values of equity, dignity,
and fairness.
  Lobbying is supporting a position, usually not based on universal values
—for example, a position that universal access to health care is not
necessary—or lobbying for harmful pesticides to be sold. In common
parlance, we use advocacy and lobbying interchangeably, but I find it
practical and useful to distinguish them.
    Enrollment is when someone inspires others to recognize and create new
pathways and possibilities based on universal values and commits to action.
It is not a typical sales or recruitment conversation. It is not about
manipulating people to fulfill an agenda. Enrollment requires us to listen
deeply from our oneness with respect, speaking in an honest and
straightforward manner, generating spontaneous conversations and action.


 Fallacy: We need to speak to what the audience will understand
 and respond to. We must be practical and do what is needed.
 There is no point talking about lofty values—that is just
 philosophy. People want jobs so they can earn more money, buy
 new cars, homes, and gadgets, take care of their family, and
 move up the social ladder.
 New Learning: People care deeply about their own happiness
 and the happiness of their loved ones. People care about others
 too. They care about the opportunity to work and contribute to
 others’ quality of life and well-being. Speaking responsibly about
 our universal values inspires people to engage in creating new
 futures.


  Speaking responsibly fosters leadership in oneself and others, just as
deep listening does. These are very important leadership skills. When we
explore and enhance our listening and speaking abilities and the way we
generate aware conversations, new possibilities emerge for a paradigm
shift.

             BEING a Mindful Implementer
Leading large-scale programs globally and nationally gave me the
opportunity to serve and learn over thirty years. Even though I was never
the head of any United Nations agency or CEO of an organization, I learned
it is possible to generate significant results using transformational
approaches when I lead specific programs, divisions, or offices within a
large organization. As long as I was cognizant of a few principles and
delivered results on the ground, I had the freedom to use various approaches
and methods. Fortunately, I had committed leadership that supported my
work in 95 percent of my jobs; and when I did not, I was proactive, found
another position, and moved within six months. In my view, life is too short
and the working hours too long to stay in places that do not allow full
potential to manifest.


  Fallacy: There is not much I can do to create the changes I think
  are necessary in an organization. I am not the CEO, so I do not
  have much say or influence. Besides, what’s the point of trying to
  generate change within a unit when the organization is so big!
  New Learning: There are many opportunities for significant
  change in most organizations within the programs and
  departments we work in. As results ensue, they have a powerful
  influence on other programs and units, and new policies and
  projects are shaped. In fact, it is often easier to start change with
  high-performing individuals and teams and within efficient
  departments than in a large organization as a whole.
  Leadership is not reserved for chairpersons and CEOs. Because
  we focus on shifting routine activities into spaces for enduring
  change, every person can lead and generate transformational
  results within their sphere of influence and accountability, no
  matter how large or small.


Practical Suggestions for Mindful Implementers—Doing
              the Same Thing Differently!
This work is not about having a new to-do list because we think that the
previous list of activities did not generate the change we wish to see. It is
about doing the same things differently to make a difference—it is about
wise, ethical, and mindful implementation.
   Transformational managers, leaders, and stewards must be clear about
the universal values that underpin their work, what results they wish to
generate, the shifts required in systems and culture, and the transformative
processes they plan to use. As expected, I have experienced managerial and
leadership challenges; I am not systematically describing how I faced them.
Here, I am sharing some practical tips that have enabled us to generate
sustainable results.

Connect to Universal Values of the Organization and Core Policies
Identifying and working with the core values, policies, and goals of the
organization is sensible and transformational. For example, the Declaration
of Commitment on HIV/AIDS at the United Nations in 2001 stated, “Strong
leadership at all levels of society is essential for an effective response to the
epidemic.… Leadership involves personal commitment and concrete
actions.”48 This was one of more than two hundred policy statements. I
focused on the leadership statement, which formed the basis of our strategy
to address HIV/AIDS using transformational approaches and praxes
through UNDP.
   The UN Charter states, “We the peoples of the United Nations
determined … to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity
and worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men and women and
of nations large and small.”49 Dignity, nondiscrimination, equity, and
freedom for everyone are the foundation of human rights. In every program
I directed, we articulated the policies derived from these universal values,
formulated strategies, implemented actions toward an equitable and new
thriving future. Aligning value-based projects with program goals, in the
context of policies, is pragmatic and essential.

Fulfill Purpose—Generate Results
Generating measurable results in priority areas of the organization, results
in programs where I was accountable, created space for other creative
initiatives. Working with our teams, I was clear about my purpose in life—
to manifest my full potential as I serve to make a difference, and create
opportunities for others to unfold as they generate results in whatever topic
or area they choose. Improving immunization coverage and other measures
to reduce childhood mortality, reducing maternal deaths, reversing the
HIV/AIDS epidemic were all organizational goals and programs that I
directed with UN teams and partners; measurable results were generated in
the different assignments. When we are clear about the results we wish to
generate, and are unambiguous about sourcing our inner capacities—not
simply “fixing it”—we are in tune with universal values, and we generate
measurable results.

Inculcate Learning through Action: It Is a Time-Saver
In every institution and program I worked in, learning and practice were an
integral component of our work. We were clear that unless we transcended
our own differences in new ways and created a culture of authentic
speaking and straight talk, we would be catalysts wanting everyone else to
change, without ever changing ourselves. Continued practice is essential,
and it is hard to create a culture of learning in most institutions.
   It is essential to find “time-saving time” to synthesize learning, process
and share learning, and integrate it into practice. In every organization,
people say there is no time—they are too busy and have to get the job done.
During one of my assignments, I was told that the time we spent on
enhancing our inner capacities and leadership competencies was excessive;
we should focus on our technical skills and have some eminent leadership
experts come over and deliver lectures on leadership. I did a rough back-of-
the-envelope calculation based on several years’ experience and showed
them that for every hour we spent on self-awareness, strengthening our
inner capacities and shifting our behaviors, we actually saved about twenty
hours. We saved time spent on interpersonal disagreements and conflict at
work; saved time by not procrastinating and delaying decisions; saved
unnecessary discussion time on the same topics in meetings.
  I also created time and space for ongoing coaching for our teams. Ravi
Pradhan, whom you met in Chapter Five, coached us at UNICEF; Allan
Henderson and Sharon Knoll at UNDP. Our coaches practiced themselves,
too, which inspired our learning.
  Reflecting on his experience, Ravi said, “At first, this may not seem so
unusual. However, given how development agencies have worked in the
past, a whole system or multistakeholder approach to generating
breakthrough results was a major innovation. A key contribution I made,
invisible as it may seem, was the application of a learning methodology that
was consistent with the findings of neuroscience—‘embodied cognition.’ In
other words, real genuine learning and skill development involves the
whole body, mind, emotions, and action and behavior.”
   Sharon generously shared all the methods and materials she had
developed in service of people and the program to reverse the HIV/AIDS
epidemic. Sharon said, “I do not view my work in terms of ‘me’ making a
contribution, significant or otherwise. I learned I am part of a global family,
and wherever I travel there are committed human beings on a team to have
things work. We left about three hundred people in the countries I was in
that are still leading and making a difference in the areas most important to
them. The common principle in both the world of business, where I have
worked extensively, and that of human development is we are all human
beings and when we build programs based on humanity and valuing life,
sustainability is available. When we interact with each other as things, units,
or pieces to be fixed, we have the world we are in now. In both cases,
people are the solution.”
   Allan Henderson said he learned from participants: a woman who had
been trafficked from Nepal to Mumbai told him how she organized an
NGO, and when Allan was visibly moved, she said, “Please do not think I
have a tragedy—you have it wrong; I use the source of my ‘inner power,’
and I have learned from my adversity.” Another participant shared, “I
realize that I have the right to step up and take leadership—I have the
permission to step up and act.” During the interviews on what people
wanted to see changed, participants said it was the first time people in the
UN had asked about what they thought and were not manipulating them
with an agenda.
   Learning is a lifelong process. In what ways do you proactively engage to
learn?

Care for Each Other
Caring for each other may seem too simple to be mentioned here. We say
that caring should be present in our family, community, workplace, schools,
or health facilities—but we know it is not always the case. Families are a
place of nurture; they are also a place of abuse. Services and the facilities
through which we serve are meant to be places to heal or grow and to
nurture well-being; and for that to happen, we must care for each other and
experience being cared for. Businesses are not just about profit—they are
also about caring for the well-being of people and sustaining a thriving
planet. Caring for each other creates an environment in which each of us
can step up and act beyond personal interests and agendas. Caring requires
us to be mindful.
   As we engaged worldwide to reverse the HIV/AIDS epidemic through
UNDP, we designed and implemented a program for our staff—We Care.
The stigma and biases that exist in society also creep into workplaces. The
purpose of the We Care initiative was to create a work environment where
people living with HIV or AIDS felt free, valued, and accepted, while
respecting confidentiality and privacy. We created education and preventive
measures for all staff, caring for each other in everyday actions with space
to bring up concerns. Program reviews showed that We Care made a
difference to staff within UNDP offices; subsequently, UN Cares was
established in different countries for all UN offices.
   Another example, this time from my family: Mudit is a pediatric
intensive care specialist who loves his work and is trusted because of his
clinical competence. He is married to Aeshna, our daughter. His caring
ways encompass his patients and his staff. Mudit showed us a drawing of
him made by a critically ill ten-year-old child in the hospital. The child
drew himself and Mudit holding hands and playing in the garden—it
reflected Mudit’s love, his listening and conversations, and the time and
attention he gives to every child. Mindful of the exhaustion of nurses at the
end of a particularly difficult night in the hospital because of critically ill
patients, Mudit acknowledges them for their work and makes the time to
buy them breakfast. And despite his extremely busy schedule, he volunteers
regularly to teach clinicians in pediatric intensive care units in developing
countries such as Armenia, China, Egypt, and India.

Partner with Others to Shift the Paradigm
There is a difference between working with like-minded people and finding
potential partners who are like-spirited or attuned. I use the word spirit to
mean our nonphysical self, the expression of our character, energy,
enthusiasm, and determination emanating from universal values. We seek
like-minded partners while addressing violence or reducing poverty or
creating green jobs. Our efforts are then synergistic—they are more than the
sum of each person’s contribution. When we work in unison with like-
minded and like-spirited people, the change we create is amplified greatly.
We are able to generate a new field, a paradigm shift, anchored firmly in
what we both stand for, our universal values, our humanity. This work is
sheer joy, even if we disagree on tactics or have differing opinions and
positions.
   When I consider partnering, I think of individuals with whom I am
attuned. How do I find these people, or how do they find me? Here is the
good news, based on my work worldwide: they are everywhere, in every
country, in every sector. Sometimes our first impressions may not be
accurate, or our chemistry may not work; the social or work environment
may be repressive and may not allow them to come forth. But through the
years we have found each other. I use five simple, practical criteria: