   People may consider the conscious full-spectrum response to be a new
meme for generating a new future. A meme is an element of a culture or
system related to behaviors that may be passed from one individual to
another by nongenetic means, especially imitation. But I consider the CFSR
to be a much deeper process because its design elements and mindful
implementation generate transformational results based on our innate
human capacities.
   Fractals occur everywhere in nature. For example, in snowflakes, in
succulent plants like the Aloe polyphylla, and in ferns, the same pattern
recurs at progressively smaller scales. In this fern (Figure 9-2), every
progressively smaller part has the same pattern as the whole.
                   Patterns for Working at Scale
Scale requires organization as well as partnering and connecting with many
different people. Often, concerned citizens, policy-makers, business people,
and authentic media professionals feel that the problems are too big, too
entrenched, and that “this is the way it is and nothing much can be done.”
However, there are groundbreaking ways to act at scale and make paradigm
shifts. We must understand the conventional ways of scaling up and
differentiate those from acting at scale for generating a new future. I will
describe three conventional ways of scaling up for specific results
(illustrated in Figure 9-3), and there are other combinations and
permutations of these examples.
  One way to scale up is to replicate a uniform and constant entity with the
same standards. For example, at Starbucks or McDonald’s, customers
expect to find the same products—the same coffee or the same hamburger
—at every location.
   Another way to scale up is to define the entities involved according to the
level of technology commensurate with what is needed. For example, the
number of high schools in a city is likely to be larger than the number of
colleges, since not all children graduating from high school go to college;
and, for the same reason, the number of colleges is likely to be higher than
universities with master’s programs. Similarly, we require a larger number
of health clinics to take care of our frequent and everyday health needs and
fewer referral hospitals with specialists to manage more complex health
problems; and we need even fewer tertiary hospitals where super-specialties
are available for treating far more complex health problems and illnesses
(Figure 9-3).
                    Figure 9-3 . Conventional Ways of Going to Scale.

   Networks and meshworks are yet another way of taking an idea and
related actions to scale, as shown in Figure 9-3. People with similar
interests connect to move their projects or ideas forward, sharing
knowledge and best practices. The internet and social media enable users to
create and share content or to participate in social networking, far beyond
our geographical locations, thereby opening vast new connections.
   The conscious full-spectrum response is different from all the patterns of
going to scale described above. The design and implementation of
conscious full-spectrum responses with commensurate results can be
accomplished by anyone. Everyone can fully participate in contributing to
action at scale. The distinct features of the CFSR are described in Chapter
Six. Every entity is based on the universal values of dignity, equity,
compassion for all; all actions or solutions are explicitly and simultaneously
integrated with strategies to shift unworkable cultural norms and systems.
   The CFSR template invites us to formulate broad directions sourced from
universal values and is based on inquiry, insights, and application. It is not a
cookie-cutter approach. A new field is generated, making universal values
the foundation of systems and normative shifts; it presences a thriving
humanity and planet. Radical, ethical leadership is realism, not idealism. It
must and will become the norm in society.
    Respond and Realize to Shift Paradigms
To generate equitable and sustainable results, we must realize our inherent
oneness and manifest our full potential in order to create alternatives that
generate prosperity for a thriving humanity and planet. At the same time,
we must authentically call out what is not working and respond effectively
to inequities, injustices, and the basic survival needs of humanity and our
planet.
   Too often we focus on one or the other—either addressing problems and
what is not working or creating alternatives and hoping that problems will
resolve on their own. Radical transformation necessitates responding to the
problems of today and simultaneously realizing our full potential to
generate alternatives for tomorrow, both sourced from universal values.


 Fallacy: I want to see a better world, but there is nothing much I
 can do, because the problems are so big. Small initiatives are
 like a drop in the ocean and will not make any difference. To
 make a difference, we need to work at scale, and I do not have
 the money nor the influence or connection to do so.
 New Learning: Everyone can directly make a difference to scale
 action and results by designing and implementing CFS
 responses at home or at work or in communities. It is strategic to
 BE in action by sourcing universal values and shifting unworkable
 norms and systems.


   The strategies for responding to problems are different from strategies to
realize our full potential to generate alternatives. Most people design
projects and initiatives thinking that if we succeed in responding to
problems (e.g., survival needs), the rest will follow. Others look at
responding to problems and realizing full potential for generating
alternatives as a sequential continuum, often describing it as an
evolutionary process. The radical transformer has a whole-systems
perspective and must have the ability to respond to problems effectively and
at the same time, put in place strategies to realize the full potential of
people to generate a paradigm shift. This is illustrated in Figure 9-4. The
radical transformer has the capabilities to design and implement initiatives
that are dynamic and meteoric, instead of slower incremental change that
does not address systemic issues.
   We must respond to the basic needs of people, but we must not presume
that they do not have the inner capacities to actualize happiness. All of us
who have worked at the grass roots have experienced the beauty and power
of the inner capacities of people who are poor and marginalized because of
the systems and cultural norms we have created in our world of abundance.
Hemlata and her colleagues, whom you met in Chapters Four and Six, are
testimony to this.




            Figure 9-4 . Responding to Challenges and Realizing Full Potential.

   Let’s explore three issues that we grapple with in present times—
survival, poverty, and violence (see Figure 9-4). The same principles apply
to other challenges.
   The mindset and strategies of survival are different from the mindset and
strategies for thriving. At home and in our families, our basic needs—
health, nutrition, education, income, energy, housing, water, sanitation, and
digital connection—must be met. But at the same time, we want health not
only to survive and reduce death and disease, but to thrive; education not
just to read and write, but to unleash our creativity and contribute to
society; we want jobs not just to earn money and fuel materialism, but to
make a difference in our workplace and society.
   The mining industry has rules that stipulate that “they do no harm to
people or the planet,” which comes from a survival mindset. What if we
establish rules, strategies, and technologies that “do no harm” and also have
rules, strategies, and technologies that create prosperity for workers and
contribute to a thriving environment?
   Rich countries are not rich in terms of equity, and they are actually poor
in terms of their courage to act for prosperity for all. For example, in India,
the insatiable demand for dowry and the atrocious consequences of
noncompliance on the bride or wife—in many rich, middle-class, as well as
low-income families—and opulent weddings in income-rich families in the
midst of dire poverty, are evidence that meeting the basic needs of people
without the foundation of universal values does not result in prosperity.
   Poverty reduction strategies have created development conditions where
a few people have been pulled out of dire circumstances and survive; but
people are not thriving. Prosperity is about synergistic strategies that
emanate from the mindset of abundance, contentment, and thriving; it is
about meeting basic needs as well as the unleashing of full potential. It is a
realistic knowing about the bountiful resources we have, a deep
understanding of the beauty of sophisticated simplicity, and the wisdom of
mindful living “in the now.”
   We generally agree, at least to be politically correct, that violence at
home, at work, and between different social groups or countries must be
stopped. The global economic impact of violence is estimated at $13.6
trillion—$2.5 trillion from crime and interpersonal violence, $6.2 trillion
through military spending and action, and $0.76 trillion from losses due to
conflict.51 We must respond to this crisis and establish cultures and societies
where violence is absent and where the fear of violence is absent. We must
also cultivate peaceful societies where we nurture human BEINGS to
manifest their full potential. The systems and cultural norms—the attitudes,
structures, and institutions—must create and sustain peaceful societies.
   Another example: Papua New Guinea has an exceptionally high level of
sexual violence, attributed to a male-dominated culture along with cultural
acceptance of rape and everyday violence. It has been estimated that 70
percent of Papua New Guinean women experience rape or assault.52 When
we were engaging to reverse the HIV/AIDS epidemic using a conscious
full-spectrum approach, four journalists decided to address rape and
generate a more peaceful society. This campaign in the media emerged as a
courageous response by committed citizens, shifting cultural norms—their
strong compassionate hearts simply could no longer sit back and watch
what was going on—individuals made choices for collective action.
  To respond to the challenge, participants took steps to enforce laws;
hotlines for women to seek help and support structures were put in place,
and educational programs on their human rights were designed and
implemented. In addition, a campaign was designed and implemented to
realize the full potential of people, “amplify the good,” and make visible the
nurturing Papua New Guinean men who were generating new icons and
cultural norms for a peaceful society.


 Fallacy: We must first focus on solving the problems in society.
 Only after that can we provide opportunities to the poor and
 marginalized to unleash their full potential. Some people talk
 about universal values—they are idealists. We must respond to
 people’s demands and be realistic. Change happens slowly—
 past experience shows that.
 New Learning: Prosperous and thriving societies are established
 when we source universal values, align our strategies and action
 to respond and solve problems; and simultaneously put in place
 strategies to realize our full potential to generate alternatives.
 With our tremendous technological advances, we can disrupt
 unworkable systems and accomplish tremendous meteoric
 transformation in a short span of time, not merely incremental
 change.


   We continue to muddle through, from crisis to crisis, never addressing
the underlying factors and systems causes of problems of humankind in a
definitive and sustained way. Yesterday, we were engaged in resolving a
crisis: HIV/AIDS. Today, we are focusing on global warming and climate
change. Tomorrow, we may focus on nuclear waste and the consequences of
the dire imbalances of our ecological systems. Sourcing universal values for
generating equitable and sustainable systems and cultural norms is the key
to responding to challenges and realizing full potential. In this way, we have
enduring results.

          Basis of Equity and Sustainability
After millions of years of evolution, for the first time, all the major threats
to our survival are human-caused. The state of the world is therefore a
consequence and expression of our own minds. In explaining our global
crises we generally focus on the importance of economic, social, and
political forces and factors as causes for the persistence of the world’s
problems. And therefore, the response focuses on technological, economic,
and political approaches. And these are indeed often necessary. But it is not
until we see the global problems as symptoms of one fundamental, deeper-
rooted crisis—the symptoms of our individual and shared mindset, where
psychological and cultural factors and forces reign—that we can begin to
mount a more profound response.
  The key to a thriving future lies in transformative approaches based on
universal values that transcend our scarcity mindset on our abundant planet
and our attachment to our own rigid ideologies and egos.

            Interrupting Exclusionary Isms
Human beings express their inner capacities through worldviews and
mindsets that manifest dignity, equity, and compassion. And human beings
also choose to limit their full potential and contribution by dominating,
exploiting, and excluding others. There was a time when slavery and
exploitative labor were accepted almost everywhere; today in many parts of
the world they are unacceptable even though they exist. Concerned scholars
who study oppressive beliefs such as racism, casteism, classism, sexism,
tribalism, and religious hatred describe the detrimental effects of these isms
and prejudices on people and societies. In Part One of this book, we noted
some of them.
   People are aware that change lies in influencing mindsets. Market
research and its application has led to skillfully shaping unending
materialism instead of responsible consumption. Political campaigns around
the world are sometimes designed to manipulate people’s preferences,
biases, and fears, instead of shaping democratic action for individual and
societal well-being for everyone. In radical transformation we are talking
about transforming our mindset based on universal values that include
everyone, everywhere, with the explicit agenda of manifesting our full
potential and innate attributes; this transformation will lead to equity,
sustainability, and prosperity for all.