
 Fallacy: If we all start sourcing universal values, we will not have
 diversity and pluralism. We will lose our independence. And we
 will be forced to accept universal values of dignity, fairness, and
 compassion like a rigid formula. It should be up to us to decide
 what to live by.
 New Learning: When we source universal values, and express
 them through strategic action, multitudes of initiatives come alive,
 and a vast array of ideas find expression based on our
 aspirations, interests, and talents. Our independence is
 wholesome through our interdependence.
 Current understanding of human beings shows that everyone has
 an innate sense of self-worth and dignity in all cultures; we have
 an innate “equity impulse”; and when our heart breaks open we
 are called to respond with compassionate action.
 Dignity, fairness, and compassion are simply inherent in us, and
 are stifled through socialization, rigid systems, and cultural
 norms.


   Concerned citizens, courageous scholars, and thoughtful policy-makers
in every country in the world are asking a fundamental question: how can
we break the cycles of classism, racism, casteism, sexism, tribalism, hateful
religiosity, our never-ending wants and greed?
   When we are committed to finding equitable and sustainable patterns that
work for humanity as a whole, we must look deeper. Finding inspiration in
the Constitution of UNESCO, which states that “since wars begin in the
minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace must be
constructed,” we can start exploring whole-systems transformation. With
the complex political, economic, and social forces at play and the
numerous, ever-increasing technologies available to us, a radical departure
from the way we addressed problems in the past is imminent. Although
individuals, organizations, and communities realize the interconnectedness
at the root of many of our global challenges, most of our responses remain
at the level of technological interventions, tinkering at the margins and
changing a few “rules of the game.” Working at this level, we are unable to
understand and respond to the root factors of unsustainable production and
consumption patterns, proliferating conflicts, and new climatic patterns.
Now, we are called to source our inner capacities and universal values in
order to think and act locally and globally to ensure intergenerational equity
and dignity as well as sustainability of our ecosystems.
  The patterns of otherness and exclusion can be interrupted by embodying
universal values for strategic action and results. Figure 9-5 illustrates this
paradigm shift. We must learn to transcend our scarcity mindset fueled by
competition and fear, and move beyond token representation, superficial
gestures of inclusion, inadequate support for people who are marginalized
by cultures or systems, and the hollow politically correct statements we
make.
   Concerned citizens focus on the rights of a particular group, for example,
women’s equity, inclusion of all genders and LGBT people, racial equity,
labor rights. They often do not recognize and realize that these are all
expressions of the same exploitative and exclusionary forces in us, our
cultures and systems. For example, there are women in India who work for
“women’s rights” but will not sit and eat with a Dalit woman or allow their
son or daughter to marry someone from another caste. In the United States,
there are groups working to have racial equity, but some of them do not see
the presence of gender-based or class inequities. Equity and dignity are a
way of BEING.
   I shared examples of interrupting the patterns of dominance, exploitation,
and exclusion in preceding chapters: Influential Muslim and Christian
religious leaders from the Arab States sourced their inner capacities and
universal values to interrupt the patriarchal and exploitative promotion of
female genital mutilation in their society. Hemlata, Sudarshan, Srilatha, and
other members of the TISS team work with people from all castes to
interrupt caste-based patterns of exploitative labor in India. Megan and her
colleagues are working to break the cycles of violence in the United States.
In all these instances, the common feature is sourcing universal values of
dignity, equity, compassion for strategic action.
                        Figure 9-5 . Decide to Interrupt Isms.

  In the leadership and stewardship programs, depending on where we are
—the country or region in the world—issues related to racism, casteism,
sexism, tribalism, and inequity inevitably surface. In the United States, in
several instances, the issue of racism arose. Policies that ensure everyone
has equal opportunity to manifest their full potential, historical knowledge
of exploitation and suffering, understanding the social and political
dynamics of racism (or any other ism), organizing to realize human rights
and responsibilities are all necessary.
   I recall a profound moment when a participant in a learning-in-action
program and I worked together—she on race and I on caste—from a
resonant space of universal values of dignity, equity, and compassion. And
from this universal value base, we mapped the interventions on a conscious
full-spectrum sheet. We also connected what keeps such otherness and
exclusion prevalent and alive. And in that profound moment, she could see
how to interrupt the pattern of racism (and casteism); and then almost all of
us in a room with nearly one hundred people could see that the only sure
way of interrupting centuries of human domination and exploitation is to
transcend our egos and source our strategic actions from our inner
capacities.
   There was a contemplative silence in the room—the deep silence that
leads to new emergence—spaces you and I have experienced. After some
time, another participant came up with her learning and her insight: she said
she was working to end racism and struggled with what she had been told
about her white privilege, which she held with a sense of guilt because of
the exploitation and suffering of many people. The guilt of white privilege
had made her feel that she should play small, which actually didn’t benefit
anyone. She shared that “in this moment, I embrace my inner capacities and
greatness, our oneness, like everyone else, without any guilt, and will act
from my greatness to disrupt racism and other inequities.”
   When injustice is present through socially constructed identities of race,
caste, class, gender, tribe, or nationality, people who touch their universal
heart of compassion and alter their mindset are called to act and address the
inequities. And when society and individuals stereotype these
compassionate people in ways that do not honor their inner capacity, we
make it harder for all of us to achieve the goals and outcomes of
interrupting these isms.
   We will unleash yet another version of the Jim Crow laws unless we look
into the root factors of otherness; the only way we can interrupt isms is to
source our oneness, our inner capacities. The Jim Crow laws, which were
formally in effect until 1965 in the United States, enforced “separate but
equal” conditions in public facilities and services, schools, and other
communal spaces. Where there were facilities for white people, there may
not have been services and facilities at all that African Americans were
allowed to use. This pattern of segregation became normalized in society,
showing up in housing, employment, and other basic tenants of community.
   Michelle Alexander’s eye-opening book, The New Jim Crow, points out
that “no other country in the world imprisons so many of its racial or ethnic
minorities. The United States imprisons a larger percentage of its black
population than South Africa did at the height of apartheid.”53 In fact, one
in four black men will experience incarceration in their lifetime. The
epidemic and normalization of mass incarceration of black men, women,
and children has in fact become a new iteration of the segregation of the
Jim Crow era. With a criminal record, even if never incarcerated, these
“marked” individuals face isolation and alienation from civic life,
employment opportunities, and other basic prerequisites for self-sufficiency
and a decent quality of life.
   While on the surface, systems that lead to the segregation of certain
populations might not seem to be biased, they are in fact designed in such a
way that they have become what Alexander describes as a contemporary
system of control. These systems are designed by humans and for humans.
And therefore to reverse the emergence of a new Jim Crow era, to create
communities where all are welcomed and treated fairly, we must both shift
the mindset of inequality that gave rise to these systems and create
pathbreaking alternatives that will lead to equitable outcomes.
   All isms are held in the relationship of one group to another. We can
interrupt the disempowering social, political, and economic isms in our
cultures, systems, structures, and societies when we choose to commit to an
equitable and sustainable world and manifest universal values for strategic
action, altering the mindset that gave rise to the ism. If we choose not to
interrupt the patterns of isms by not sourcing our universal values and retain
the same mindset and ideology, we will face another version of the same
ism even though we have strategies to address the present problems. The
New Jim Crow describes the new expression of racism in the United States.
Similar patterns of exclusion hold true elsewhere in the world for the
different expressions of various isms that create suffering in humanity.
   We can interrupt classism or inequity too. The financial and economic
policies that concentrate wealth and power in the hands of a few at the
expense of many were formulated by people. Citizens, farsighted corporate
leaders, and responsible politicians are people too, and can see the impact
of massive inequities and climate change on humanity and generations to
come. Standing in universal values, they can interrupt classism and take
policy measures to break the patterns. For example, there is no reason why
universal free education from elementary school through college and
universal health care cannot be provided. Education and fostering
capabilities are the foundation for equity and prosperity. We could simply
stop lobbying, and being a lobbyist becomes a profession of the past. We
could have a fair taxation system and proportionately tax wealth,
corporations, and dividends and have less tax on wages and consumption.
We could stop tax havens. And these steps will leave all people and society
prosperous. The wealthy do not need more wealth—they too want well-
being and happiness.