   Do they value the inner space, wisdom, for sourcing action? The
   contemporary pioneer.
   Do they burn for fairness? Do injustices bother them? The unifying
   architect.
   Do they have a track record of producing results? The mindful pro-
   activist.
   Do they foster other people’s leadership? The radical transformer.
   Do they renew themselves and invest in their own growth? All of the
   above.

  I have found it very useful to distinguish three modalities of engagement
with partners once we have agreed to work together with shared values.
  First, coordination—the usual processes of defining who does what. With
whom do I need to partner to coordinate my work? The finance department?
Which organizations run the same campaign; with whom do I need to
coordinate to avoid unnecessary duplication? When we coordinate with
openness, trust, and accountability, we create spaces for new cooperative
norms and systems to emerge.
  Second, collaboration to achieve results—working together to achieve
outcomes, goals, outputs related to the mission or purpose requires us to
move beyond individual leadership to shared leadership; to give prime
importance to the mission and its goals (for example, ending poverty and
establishing prosperity, reversing the HIV/AIDS epidemic) rather than
promoting one’s organization.
   Third, synergy and resonance for greater impact—working together
based on universal values means that spaces of competition dissolve into
spaces of joyful acknowledgment of each other’s success. We recognize that
when the other succeeds, we are closer to the mission, purpose, and goals;
this reflects success within all organizations involved; and the work through
my organization is closer to success too.
   Distinguishing coordination, collaboration, and synergy clarifies why we
are engaging and what to expect from others. Too often, we build
expectations, and when they are thwarted, we resent the partner. For
example, in one of our UNICEF country offices, because of the vibrant
partnership we had with Rotarians in the immunization program, some staff
members expected Rotarians to also collaborate with us in the program to
address child labor. When the Rotarians were not enthusiastic, the staff
members were disappointed. Rotarians had given importance to child
survival, and we assumed that this meant we would partner together on
child protection; but our expectations were thwarted.
   Synergistic and resonant partnerships are cornerstones of large-scale
transformation when their strategic actions span the entire range of the
conscious full-spectrum response, based on universal values.
  The key abilities of a mindful pro-activist include:

   Transforming routine and daily activities in order to manifest each
   person’s full potential.
   Enhancing management, leadership, stewardship: holding multiple
   perspectives without compromising values; making ethical decisions
   even when they are difficult; taking action in order to generate results
   that further dignity, equity; ensuring clarity, transparency, accountability
   in our different roles and responsibilities.
   Creating a culture of integrity by BEING our word; ensuring
   congruence between universal values and strategic action; speaking up;
   embodying universal values instead of only talking about them.
   Communicating as an impetus for universal values to manifest;
   cultivating resilience by being assertive; expecting resistance when
   challenging the status quo; managing the inevitable insult and ridicule.
   Speaking about inner capacities to manifest a paradigm shift; expressing
   principled outrage but not destructive anger; discerning with an open
   heart and mind; articulating what is present in order to make wise
   decisions; not judging people; upholding dignity and at the same time
   speaking up and acting against exploitative and exclusionary “honor
   codes” and “honor killing.”
   Enrolling others to see new possibilities, commit to action, generate
   equitable and sustainable results; creating synergistic partnerships.
   Holding governments, corporations, institutions, and communities
   accountable for dignity and equity for all people and for establishing a
   healthy environment and planet.
   Using free time to learn, gain new knowledge, understand systemic and
   cultural issues in order to support wise policies and decisions locally
   and nationally.
   Redefining the current paradigm of recreation in order for it to be life-
   enhancing; seeking inspiration, adventure, joy in nature; shifting away
   from numbing sources of recreation that sap our creativity, vitality, and
   self-expression.

  BEING a mindful implementer is joyful and requires discipline of
practice.
                           Chapter 8
 Manifesting My Full Potential: A Choice
    BEING the Contemporary Pioneer,
 Unifying Architect, Mindful Pro-Activist,
  and Radical Transformer—All at Once
   An outer activity as well as an inner change is needed and it must be at
   once a spiritual, cultural, educational, social and economic action.
                                                         SRI AUROBINDO
We are more than our social characteristics. We are profound conscious
human BEINGS. It is each person’s choice to include and transcend our
social identities—nationality, race, religion, gender, class—and choose to
anchor ourselves in our inner capacities as we take action to manifest our
greatness.

                 We Are All—and at Once
The three intertwined attributes—our universal heart of compassion,
empathetic burning for equity and fairness, our discerning eye seeing both
invisible and visible patterns with light and pristine clarity—exist within
each one of us. These three life-enhancing attributes are innate in human
beings, though they may be clouded by our socialization process and by
culture. They are not determined by the level of formal education, expertise,
social status, or poverty or wealth—they are simply present. They are not
based on aptitude, our personality, or our preference.
  The three universal values of dignity, equity, and compassion that
underpin our work are based on inherent aspects of human beings
everywhere.
                          Figure 8-1 . We Are All at Once.


 BEING the Contemporary Pioneer, Unifying
 Architect, Mindful Pro-Activist, and Radical
                Transformer
As I engage worldwide, people everywhere ask me similar questions for
clarity. “In your experience, do you find that some people have a greater
aptitude to be one of the three ‘types’ of people, instead of all three at once
—the contemporary pioneer, unifying architect, and mindful pro-activist? In
this era of specialization, should we focus on cultivating one of the three
aspects?”
   It is our choice to embark on the adventure of discovering and
manifesting our full potential. To manifest our full potential, we need to
explore and cultivate all three of these intertwined dimensions of ourselves.
In this era of technology, of the “knowledge economy” and specialization, it
is even more important to synthesize in order to create value-based
alternatives for enduring and equitable results.
  At first, it may seem complex to BE all three simultaneously—the
contemporary pioneer, unifying architect, and mindful pro-activist. Yet, as
we choose to engage and as we practice, we see how powerful, fulfilling,
and simple it actually is!
    All of us have the potential to make a significant difference in the world.
It is a choice. Once we make the choice to embark on life’s discovery and
adventure to realize our full potential, the rest follows through inquiry,
insight, and practice.
   In Part Three, we explore what it means to go to scale. We manifest the
contemporary pioneer, unifying architect, and mindful pro-activist within us
to be the radical systems and cultural transformer.
          PART 3
GENERATING RESULTS AT SCALE
                            Chapter 9
       The Radical Systems and Cultural
                Transformer
           Everyone’s Contribution
   I don’t know Who—or what—put the question. I don’t know when it was
   put. I don’t even remember answering. But at some moment I did answer
   Yes to Someone—or Something—and from that hour I was certain that
   existence is meaningful and that, therefore, my life, in self-surrender, had
   a goal.
   From that moment I have known what it means “not to look back” …
                                      DAG HAMMARSKJÖLD, MARKINGS
In today’s globalized world, people who care and have the courage to
engage in tackling the major problems we face, such as climate change or
dire poverty in a world of abundance, look for solutions that are equitable,
enduring, and at scale.
   The conscious full-spectrum response, when applied, contributes to
generating a paradigm shift—a shift in which humanity and our planet
thrive based on the universal values of dignity, fairness, compassion. In this
chapter, we explore how everyone can contribute to the paradigm shift, and
everyone can choose to generate results and bring about the necessary
transformation at scale through their capabilities and actions. It is no longer
about how big or small anyone’s idea or initiative is; or whether we work
outside or nurture a family at home; or whether or not we have the financial
resources to design and implement a project. It is about one’s commitment,
not just as intention, but commitment-in-action; and a yearning to presence
and nurture a thriving humanity and planet!
  I have been blessed with opportunities to serve at scale in my work life,
particularly in my work with the United Nations. The design templates I am
sharing are the ones I used and refined to generate results around the world.
With every new assignment, I added what was missing and integrated new
elements from my insights and continued learning—always in the context
of achieving goals and accomplishing outcomes. For example, I was part of
a program that organized immunization services for twenty-five million
infants and twenty-five million pregnant women every year in over six
hundred thousand villages and numerous urban locations in India. In the
year 2000, I was working to reduce maternal deaths in South Asia, a place
that at the time was home to 22 percent of the world’s women and
accounted for 50 percent of maternal deaths worldwide.50 I have worked
globally in 170 countries to increase child survival and to address stigma
and discrimination against people living with HIV/AIDS and increase their
access to treatment. These were all highly demanding challenges that
resulted in rewarding accomplishments.

          CFSR: The Fractal of Large-Scale
                  Transformation
The pattern of the conscious full-spectrum response is a fractal, and when
repeated in its numerous applications irrespective of the theme or topic, it
generates paradigm shifts at scale.
   A fractal may be defined as “a pattern that repeats itself.” The Oxford
English Dictionary defines fractal as “a curve or geometric figure, each part
of which has the same statistical character as the whole.”
                   CFSR—the Pattern for Scale
A conscious full-spectrum response (CFSR) to any specific situation is a
fractal of the whole paradigm shift; in other words, each idea, initiative, or
endeavor designed as a CFSR response has the same characteristics as the
whole. What are these characteristics of the whole? There are three essential
components of CFSR: (1) sourcing inner capacities and universal values for
action—acting from our oneness; (2) shifting systems and cultural norms,
creating new patterns, BEING a principled game changer; and (3) solving
problems.
  And they apply no matter what we do and where we work—at home, in
our community, or in an organization. Imagine what would be possible and
present if every political party, business, educational institution, health
facility, and environmental or legal institution designed their organization,
their work, their initiatives in a conscious full-spectrum way. Sourcing
universal values for strategic action, using technological advances to serve
humanity as a whole, creating new patterns that presence equity and
sustainability would become the norm—the way things are always done. It
would usher in the next stage of our civilization.




                  Figure 9-1 . The CFSR Fractal: A New Field at Scale.
                        Figure 9-2 . The Fern Leaf: A Fractal.