
       Leveraging Opportunities for Radical
                 Transformation
Throughout this book, you have met people from different walks of life
who are leveraging the opportunities and entry points to presence an
equitable and sustainable world. They are citizens, experts, social services
providers, politicians; people from government, academia, businesses,
nonprofits, the media. By leverage, I mean the ability to use one’s influence
and entry points to generate effective and powerful results. Our
commitment and courage to create value-based alternatives is foundational.
In her erudite systems work, Donella Meadows states that the power to
transcend paradigms is the most effective intervention for systems
transformation; and it is the mindsets or paradigm of people who create
these systems—its goals, structure, rules, parameters—which must shift.67
Leveraging to presence radical transformation in order to generate
transformative results requires us to work with partners with approaches
that generate paradigm shifts.
                       Invitation to Leverage
Exploring the foundation of our work together sets pathways to accomplish
results—getting in touch with our compassion, stating the universal values
that will underpin our strategies, articulating the systems and normative
shifts, seeing new entry points for leverage, opening up to the adventure of
unforeseen possibilities. We embarked on this exploration when we worked
on a program to reduce maternal mortality in eight countries of South Asia
—Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, the Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan,
and Sri Lanka.
   The strategies to reverse the HIV/AIDS epidemic and enhance
Leadership for Results began with an inspiring retreat with the top
leadership of the United Nations and UNDP from thirty countries. Maria
Ndlovu, a public speaker, invited everyone in the room to walk with her
through her life’s journey, bringing people to tears, urging them to step up
and act. Annie McKee and Frances Johnston, proficient consultants who
worked with our teams in UNDP, skillfully deepened the space for
participants to get in touch with their own leadership. Everyone in the room
saw new openings, and half of them committed to radical strategic action.
Annie and Fran brought their personal values of dignity and equity and their
commitment to reversing the HIV/AIDS epidemic and to social change and
created spaces for value-based actions at this meeting and later at the
national level.
   Probir Banerjee, founder of a nonprofit, PondyCAN, opened the door for
me to work in Auroville, because he values this work and share it with
others. He says that the radical transformative work created a huge shift in
him and made his path clear and journey in life enjoyable. He says that by
practicing the processes, “the clutter in my mind seems to have disappeared,
my weaknesses do not bother me anymore, and I see problems as
opportunities for growth, which is helping me toward achieving my full
potential. Professionally I am able to inspire others to committed action and
build a synergy for making systems shift in all the projects. I am seeing
results as never before.”
   The way we begin our conversations to effect radical transformation sets
the stage: Will we source universal values and people’s inner potential and
capacity for equitable and sustainable change? Or will we design our
strategies based only on technical and management solutions?
    Transforming Philanthropy, Generating Prosperity
Philanthropists respond to human suffering by providing support. The next
generation of philanthropy and charity is evolving—moving from
responding only to basic survival needs of people and the planet toward
solving problems and generating new paradigms, new social forms,
outcomes, and impacts that presence equity, sustainability, and thriving. I
refer to this as conscious reciprocity to distinguish this next stage from the
conventional forms of charity and philanthropy.
   The charity and philanthropy mindset is built on generosity and giving,
usually based on the concerns of the philanthropist. Unintended or intended
consequences may include the donor acting as hero by rescuing those in
need. Compliance may be expected from beneficiaries because they are
receiving money; nonprofits may receive money from a donor or
corporation that expects name recognition or sponsorship in return. Donors
feel good about giving money to the needy, even though they continue to
maintain the status quo and perpetuate the systems and cultural norms that
give rise to the very problems they are solving.
   Conscious reciprocity, however, sources the inner capacities and the
ability to transform systems and cultural norms of both donor and recipient
as they solve problems. It is based on the principle that we are
interdependent, that all of us have a stake in creating the future. Both
recipients and donors participate in processes in which all members are
invited to discover their deeper aspirations, what they stand for, and
generate transformative results.
   Therese Adams is the development director for a nonprofit serving
families experiencing homelessness. In the fall of 2015, she coordinated an
appreciation party for the donors. Therese says, “This event was different
than any other donor relation event I had done in the past. I created a
transformational event by using the concept of conscious reciprocity.
  “A traditional donor event is often held at an upscale restaurant or venue
and includes fancy decor, flowers, and a gourmet dinner with wine. Often a
token client from the nonprofit thanks the donors for their contributions and
speaks about how the nonprofit changed the client’s life. At our donor
appreciation party, we wanted to promote the sense of equity in society, and
equity with the donors and the women living in the shelter. Holding the
event where the women lived created a different dynamic than if the women
were meeting the donors at an upscale restaurant.”
   They planned a simple event with tables arranged in the backyard,
offered simple but delicious appetizers. Speakers from the shelter shared
what they cared deeply about—their universal values—when they spoke of
their experiences. The clients also talked about being parents, with
challenges just like everyone else. Therese shares, “This created a space for
everyone present to open their hearts. And in that moment, when grace was
also present, there was no donor or client—there were only parents and
human beings.
   “The outcome of the event was different than any other event I had
coordinated. By the end of the evening, the attendees were visibly touched.
I believe donors saw themselves in the clients at the shelter. After the event,
the donors who came that day took on a new level of investment. They
began to undertake roles such as signing up to volunteer, joining the board,
and increasing their personal donations. Many of them still speak about
how deeply moving the event was.
   “I designed the event differently. I stand for generosity and equity, which
I wove throughout the event. I have seen in action that if universal core
values are communicated, people can resonate with each other regardless of
class, race, gender, age, or opinions. I identified what shifts were needed to
turn a regular donor party into a transformational event. The focus was to
shift the charity mindset to conscious reciprocity and to promote generosity.
We had conversations with everyone to connect to a deeper purpose and
engagement.
   “Using the conventional charity or philanthropy model creates a
separation between the donor and the people the nonprofits serve. There is a
hierarchy inherent in the interaction. By creating an event that promotes
conscious reciprocity, donors’ hearts open, and they give for their own well-
being, for their community, for the people they serve. Donors see the issues
of poverty, homelessness, and inequity differently. They feel personally
invested in solving the problem and are more likely to be co-creators of
solutions.”
   Philanthropy plays an important role in global aid flows, affecting
development outcomes in different countries. The traditional model of
development across centuries by faith-based organizations was built around
a model of charity that provides goods, services, and technologies that
address the immediate causes of poverty, hunger, and war; now, many of
these organizations are working on empowerment. Similarly, we turn to
emergency relief as the immediate response to the complex emergencies
caused by human and natural disasters. As we seek to develop responses
that bridge emergency relief toward sustainable development, philanthropic
models have evolved to include institutional development and advocacy
strategies that address more systemic issues impacting complex
emergencies and human suffering.
   While necessary, these models have proven insufficient in transforming
systems of exclusion and human strife. Examining underlying factors that
inform philanthropic and aid models gives us access to a new perspective.
Inquiring at this level, we start to understand philanthropy, aid, and giving
as reciprocity: a process of mutual learning and exchange that empowers
individuals and communities through service to others. And a process that
responds to the challenges; and at the same time, creates opportunities for
people to manifest their full potential.
   The results we generate through conscious reciprocity empower both the
giver and the recipient of aid, creating a whole new context for global
giving. In this understanding, philanthropy becomes grounded in a mindset
of abundance, where we realize and share the oneness of the human
condition beyond material disparities.
   Ashish, our son, is an accomplished business executive. He quietly
supports the education of many children whose parents are street vendors in
Mumbai, so that they are able to achieve learning levels in spite of their
disadvantages in school. The children whose parents are educated find it
easier to learn. For him, giving is a matter of expanding himself, without
expecting any credit, recognition, or return. It is what we call conscious
reciprocity.
  I fondly recall a time when nine-year-old Ashish participated in
anganwadi activities in villages in India. An anganwadi is a child care
center for children below six years of age. He enjoyed playing with the
children and supporting the anganwadi worker in her daily tasks, and had
many fun stories to share at the end of the day.
        Next-Generation Movements and Campaigns
There are points in history where some human beings who see social,
economic, and political fault lines rise to the surface and step up to bring a
new vision of dignified and equitable humanity into existence. And
although we stand alone in our commitment and courage to act, we seldom
move forward alone … there are always others whose compassionate hearts
are wide open, and are also called to act. Previously unimaginable shifts
have happened—ending apartheid, the civil rights movement, ending
geographic colonization (although it has been replaced by economic
colonization), gender quality and equity, enhancing labor rights. But we
have not experienced the full potential of these movements, and we
continue with our othering mindset.
   Movements to address social injustices where concerned people organize
and work in an active way toward particular political, economic, and social
goals and campaigns where a group of people work together in order to
advance their shared political, social, or artistic ideas are usually based on
values such as equity and social justice. They are not propelled or carried
along by force in a specified direction. However, there is a missing piece:
embodying the universal values of dignity, equity, and compassion and
BEING able to see the inner greatness and potential in everyone, where we
have the courage to call out what is not working, speak truth to power and
generate alternatives, transcending the “us-them” dichotomies. It is the
beautiful and potent integration of personal transformation with systems
transformation, where we continuously cultivate our own power and
capacity as leaders and understand and activate our roles in bringing about
broader systems and cultural shifts in our society.
   I have worked with many mindful pro-activists, people whose
compassion calls them to act beyond self-centered interests. They are from
different fields in various countries—government personnel and
businessmen who care about their colleagues, society, and the planet;
scientists and experts using their talents to transform people’s lives; socially
aware philanthropists and media professionals; citizens engaged in ending
casteism, racism, tribalism, bonded labor, and classism, bringing social
justice and equity to people. As I learn from them, I offer my ability to
transcend the typical “us versus them” paradigm that keeps us from
realizing our full potential, individually and collectively. They understand
what is missing in the foundation of their work, their strategies and their
responses.
   Kobi Skolnik, from the Occupy movement, approached me to develop a
program for their leaders—it was named Occupy Manifest. Soon, most
participants discovered that this work is about “the 99 percent and the 1
percent,” even as we call out what is not working and take steps to make
change. The Occupy movement morphed, people in the movement
continued in their own way. And the seeds of the conscious full-spectrum
response blossomed in different ways.
   Kobi shared, “I learned that when we connect from what we stand for—
our wisdom source—with others with different social profiles, the quality of
the connection and commitment is deeper and is sustained for longer. For
instance, this summer while the war was taking place back home in Israel
and Palestine, I was able to sit with youth from Palestine and Lebanon and
work through the shared pain. Connecting to the inner self and our values
helped us to stay together despite what the social norms or the environment
think of such interactions. Words are hard to use here because all of us lost
friends to the conflict and were able to connect to each other while the
waves of hatred and bloodbath surrounded us.”
   Willow Brugh, from the MIT Media Lab, said, “I learned that equity and
justice are the two things that drive what I do, and when I source from
there, all the complications and dramas of working with various
organizations and individuals just sort of melt away. It’s easier to see what
needs doing, and how to get there. I listen to people, instead of plowing
over them. I consider the whole space, and how to contribute back to that.
We design our programs differently. I spend more time on things that are
strategic and less time on urgent unimportant things.
  “It’s such a subtle thing and it’s difficult to pull out specific instances.
The rage I once felt a large amount of the time bubbling under the surface is
now replaced by a desire to understand and act. It’s opened me up to
conversations I wouldn’t have otherwise been a part of.”
   Radical transformation connects our very personal BEING, inner
capacity, and knowing to structured analysis and project planning. Together,
we dig deep into our personal values and principles to use them not just as
the foundation of our projects but the entire blueprint.