
  Eleanor Roosevelt said, “No one can make you feel inferior without your
consent.”
   Ridicule, insult, and obstruction are inevitable because of the way we
humans currently operate with a mindset of domination, scarcity, and
competition. When we don’t take these things personally, it frees up space
for new possibilities to emerge.
   My first professional presentation was at an international conference on
health financing in the late 1970s; it was held in New Delhi at my alma
mater, the All India Institute of Medical Sciences. I had done my research
and interviewed people in villages and urban slums, and my presentation
was an argument for health care without a fee for those who could not
afford to pay. Even before I could finish, a senior expert from one of the
Bretton Woods institutions in Washington, DC, came up, took the
microphone away from me, and said, “You are a really beautiful Indian
woman, and emotional too!” I felt dressed down and insulted! I have since
learned that insult has nothing to do with me—it is about the mindset of the
other person. Time and again, I am in similar situations, but my internal
state and external responses are very different.
  Khadija Moalla, the Tunisian lawyer and a mindful pro-activist whom
you met in previous chapters, has also cultivated this capacity. Recently, in
a meeting on women’s rights in Dakar, when some executive heads of
government departments from West Africa insulted her in public and made
disparaging personal remarks because she spoke up against physical
violence inflicted on women in the region, Khadija was able to remain
unruffled and continue in the meeting.
   Practice this—it works! When colleagues, friends, or family members
ridicule you, make fun of you in a diminishing way, insult you, or ignore
you, notice how you feel. Decide not to accept this “gift of words.” And,
maybe, express your decision not to accept their gift!
          Distinctions and Praxes Enhancing Aware
                       Communication
Based on the CFSR template, here are some mindful conversations we have
as we implement programs, at our workplace and at home.

   BEING “unmessable with,” distinguished from a defensive position of
   “don’t mess with me.” In other words, BEING steady in wisdom, and
   sourcing our inner capacities for action.
   Courageous heart responses, distinguished from emotional reactions—
   in order to transcend social, cultural, and institutional dichotomies.
   Courage, distinguished from bravado. Courage is action born out of a
   compassionate and caring heart, not BEING able to walk past pain with
   indifference; bravado is related to daring acts, and is most often based
   on social constructs and expectations.
   Worldviews emanating from universal values, distinguished from points
   of view based on ideology or one’s social identity.

  Here are a few other distinctions that further transformative
communication for action and results.
  Principled outrage is distinguished from destructive anger. Principled
outrage and destructive anger often sound the same. Principled outrage
might look like anger externally, but it is not anger.
  Destructive anger is a reaction that damages and diminishes self and
other. Our ability to regulate our anger—not suppress it—is necessary for
mindful implementation. When we fly into a rage, are triggered, or need to
be right in order to make the other person wrong, it is our emotion that is in
charge. As a result, we are unable to source our full potential; there is no
space to generate transformation. To be able to transcend destructive anger,
we must first experience and notice our anger.
   Megan, whom we met in Chapters Five and Six, shares her example of
principled outrage. “Recently, I learned that several politicians in a
predominantly Latino community had undermined work we were doing on
youth violence prevention there, using the fact that we were white as a
reason to create a barrier. I was then in a meeting where the barrier arose,
yet the undercurrent of race was swept under the carpet. I certainly felt
emotion and reaction arise, but I took a breath, actually several, and waited
until I could formulate a response that came from my stand of dignity and
justice for all, that could recognize and name our shared commitment to
equity and peace, and that could name and make visible what was not okay.
I did not take their comments personally. I spoke up and spoke out, and it
completely shifted the meeting and the interactions I had with partners
afterward. Getting angry and reactive would not have done that—
destructive anger does not give us space to create change, to do things
differently. It makes others wrong, us right, and only honors our own
perspectives on what is happening. It comes from our fears and triggers,
and sends others straight to theirs.”
   Most of us can recall incidents where we experienced or expressed
principled outrage in our lives; and also recall incidents of destructive
anger. These are two very different states within us.
   Discernment is distinguished from judgment. Discernment is our ability
to think critically, informed by universal values. For universal values such
as compassion, dignity, and fairness to be the basis of strategic action, we
need to cultivate discernment. We tend to look at what is happening through
the lens of right or wrong, us or them, blame or shame. As a result, we tend
to polarize opinions and behave in a self-righteous manner—judging
ourselves and judging others and continuously badgering. I am not using
the word judgment in the legal sense or in the way it is defined in some
religious scriptures.
  Distinguishing discernment from judgment is freeing and practical.
Discernment is seeing things as they are, not as we want them to be, with an
open heart and stilling our chattering mind. Discernment is noticing what is
present in a situation and then choosing to act based on universal values.
Judgment is placing a value of right or wrong, better than or less than, on a
situation and then choosing to act from that space. Recently, a popular guru
from India made a public statement judging farmers who committed suicide
as “people who are not spiritual.” Farmers have to take loans, and when the
crops fail because of climate change and drought or floods, there is no
support. Such judgments create disempowering societal conversations and
ignite indifference. With judgment there are limited choices for action—
with discernment there are many important nuances and more options for
action.
   Honor based on dignity for all is distinguished from honor for social
compliance. Dignity and honor are used synonymously in common
parlance, but we distinguish them in our work in order to shift
disempowering norms. We relate the word dignity to one’s self-esteem, self-
worth, self-respect. Dignity is a universal value underpinning all our work
and applies to everyone everywhere.
   Honor upholds dignity between people and groups and creates an
interactive space for the expression of wholesome relationships.
Unfortunately, in large parts of the world, the word honor has been hijacked
by divisive forces to create a culture of fear and control.
                Table 7-1. Aware Conversations for Radical Transformation.

Conversations sourcing inner                      Uncreative, unproductive
capacities and universal values                   societal conversations
BEING unmessable with                Don’t mess with me
Courageous heart responses           Emotional reactions
Courage                              Bravado
Worldviews based on universal values Views based on ideology or
                                     social identities
Discernment                          Judgment
Principled outrage                   Destructive anger
Honor based on dignity for all       Honor for social control and
                                     compliance
Embodying values—living what I stand Values as rhetoric
for
Sourcing universal values to shift   Offering superficial “fixes” for
unworkable systems and norms         problems

   We distinguish (1) dignity, an inner capacity and a universal value, (2)
honor based on the supportive universal values of dignity, fairness, and
compassion, and (3) dishonorable so-called honor, such as honor killing or
“honor of the gang.” These stark examples may seem self-evident, but
during the learning-in-action sessions, we see how difficult it is initially for
people to notice the subtle or the blatant mechanisms of social control in
their families and workplaces and in society. Practitioners start to recognize
the ways in which insults, shaming, and guilt are routinely used for control
and domination, and they practice how to build resilience. They notice
when the word honor is abused to reinforce otherness and separating
actions, domination, and even exploitation of others. They speak up and
speak out to generate new conversations.
  Fallacy: We are one big family—our different castes, tribes,
  religious sects, and races. These ways of organizing ourselves
  have worked for thousands of years, continue to work now, and
  will work into the future. The problem is that we are not abiding
  by these cultural divisions that serve us, each in their rightful
  place.
  New Learning: Diversity is a space of celebration and inclusion.
  As human beings, we have much more in common than we have
  differences—we all experience love, compassion, sorrow, joy,
  grief, and the need to belong, to dance and sing, to revere nature
  and life. We are interdependent.


             Deep Listening, Responsible Speaking
It is a choice to develop the ability to listen deeply. There are many books
on listening; different types of listening exercises are used to improve
communication, each having its own purpose and utility. Researchers
conducting surveys are asked to listen carefully and record verbatim;
negotiators are trained to listen for what is not said in the midst of conflict.
   In our work, we cultivate the ability to listen proactively and deeply. I
learn to still my mind and open my heart. We mentally filter what people
say and do; hence, noticing my conversations, knowing the assumptions I
make, is the beginning of releasing my biases and even my unintentional
discrimination. Human beings listen to what others say in a particular way
subconsciously—almost in an automatic way—without being aware of it.
Instead of listening deeply, we tend to judge what is being said as right or
wrong, find fault, build the argument while someone else is speaking in
order to put forth our point of view.
   Deep listening develops one’s own leadership capacities and fosters
leadership in others. Practitioners are amazed at their own ability to see
others unfold as they listen deeply, without even saying a word. To be able
to listen deeply, stilling the chatter in our mind, suspending judgment and
opinions for a while, appreciating the other person’s reality the way it is for
them, opens up new learning, new possibilities.
 Fallacy: There is no point in listening carefully to everyone; we
 need to be practical and listen to the opinions of those who have
 knowledge and expertise or those who have influence and are in
 power.
 New Learning: Listening deeply creates new openings for
 action. Everyone can make a difference. It is not about expertise
 or opinions. Listening deeply helps unfold the full potential of
 another human BEING.


   Conversations at home, at work, and in society create the culture of
thriving. In other words, society, organizations, and groups are networks of
conversations that can create new futures. By the time I led UNICEF’s India
team on universal immunization, I had been exposed to several
management trainings within the organization and powerful advocacy
programs. This training, combined with my earlier formal learning and my
father’s perspective that everyone can contribute provided they have the
opportunity to do so, helped me establish spaces for meaningful
conversations to take place.47 Through these conversations with
stakeholders from every sector and every level, we built a stronger
foundation for action and generated measurable results—immunization
coverage increased from 30 to 80 percent in infants and pregnant women in
three years.
   Heba, a young professional pharmacist from Egypt, stands for dignity,
justice, and caring. She was part of the team addressing HIV/AIDS in the
Arab States. What Heba learned and practiced to reverse the HIV/AIDS
epidemic she now applies in her work to make medicine accessible in
developing countries. She relentlessly advocates for this accessibility by
addressing intellectual property protection, public health and pricing
policies, pharmaceutical manufacturing, and generic competition—all
major international and national factors influencing access to affordable
medicines in developing countries.
   Heba is a mindful pro-activist, challenging systems for sustainable
change, working with people in the system rather than against them; but she
is steadfast in calling out what is not working. Others have taken an
oppositional stance. She says, “I have to continuously draw attention to
issues which are overlooked. I am working to shift the focus to promoting
local generic production and investing in the national pharmaceutical
industry. I critique medicine pricing policies of the government and frame
them as barriers to access to affordable medicines in light of a limited
health care budget. I have more courage to discuss ‘systems’ with those
who, in theory, design them: the government. I am able to critique systemic
issues, based on research and evidence, and propose alternatives.
   “It is the simple and basic practices that helped me realize results—
expressing my BEING in terms of the values I stand for and believe in, my
life’s purpose, choosing to live out these values on a day-to-day basis.
Often, I needed to inquire and restore congruence between what I stand for,
deeply believe in, and what I wish to see happening in my professional life.
This work helped me very much to realize that I should not hide myself and
live in a closet. I am the same person everywhere, and this has to be
expressed, because it is my inner power and greatness, and it is valuable.
The good inside me has to come out and translate into good deeds and
thoughts which could make this world a better place.”
   Heba’s speaking is transformational. Figure 7-2 illustrates the
transformational speaking frame using the example of Heba’s work on
having essential medicines for all.
             Figure 7-2 . Transformational Speaking: Having Medicine for All.