  Constellations: Organizing for a Paradigm
                    Shift
Action at scale for a paradigm shift is inextricably linked with the way we
connect, operate, and organize institutions, projects, initiatives, and ideas.
How we function at home, at work, and in society depends upon the norms,
mechanisms, processes, relationships, and institutions we choose to put in
place. As family members, citizens, or staff in an organization, we must be
able to express our feelings, articulate our interests, exercise our rights,
mediate our differences, and solve our problems.
   One of the four synergistic operational strategies of stage two is the
establishment of constellations—entities that operate from the universal
values.
  When we establish entities—families, organizations, institutions,
coalitions—we have the choice to develop them as spaces and places that
nurture the full potential of people who are part of that family or entity. We
have the choice to use transformative processes in everyday life and in all
our functions, which are elaborated in Parts Two and Three of this book.
Then, we can proactively generate equitable and sustainable results based
on universal values of dignity, equity, and compassion that shift the
paradigm. These types of families and entities are the “stars” of a
constellation.
   What do we mean by constellation? The Oxford English Dictionary
defines constellation as “a group of stars forming a recognizable pattern
that is traditionally named after its apparent form or identified with a
mythological figure” and as “a group of associated or similar people or
things.” In our work, constellation means entities or people that connect,
organize themselves, and operate in a particular recognizable way, based on
universal values of dignity, equity, and compassion, and establish equitable
and sustainable systems and cultural norms and proactively respond to
solve the problems facing them at any given time, which in turn impacts
humanity and the planet.
   There are several ways of connecting. For example, we may wish to link
up with people, groups, or projects for particular actions, such as watching a
football game or serving in a soup kitchen. Or, we may wish to network
with a group that has similar interests, such as animal rights or pollution
free environments, where we may advocate for policy change or share best
practices on the topic. In a constellation we connect through resonance,
through an entity or family, simply because we are attuned to each other,
operating from universal values of dignity, fairness, compassion.
  Creative ideas are being put forth to organize and operate as a
constellation based on universal values, for example, the transition
movement.65 This is a nascent, exciting new field, in which we live and
work in a manner congruent with who we are, what we stand for, with
systems and norms that are life-enhancing, individually and collectively.
  A constellation, which is the way we connect, operate, and organize, has
some unique features.
   Every entity and person in the constellation is the center of the
   constellation, and, at the same time, is the periphery as well as the field.
   Each entity and person is unique and operates independently, and, at the
   same time, is resonant and interdependent with other entities, people,
   and the planet. They are all committed to generating a thriving humanity
   and planet, shifting dysfunctional systems and cultural norms through
   an architecture that sources the universal values of dignity, fairness, and
   compassion for action. They are part of the same “thrive-system” of
   life!
   Each entity and person is a source of inspiration for others to commit to
   action. They are self-inspired, experience the joy of BEING in action,
   enjoy prosperity with equitable and sustainable results, and are able to
   persist and keep up the momentum!
   The entities and people in the constellation are awake and aware of our
   inherent oneness. They are aware that the mindset that emanates from
   our oneness generates worldviews that transcend otherness and
   conventional us-them dichotomies, and the isms we have created.
   Entities and people in a constellation self-organize, without external
   pressures. They establish ways to notice the integrity of their strategies
   and actions and have self-correcting mechanisms.
   The pattern of the each entity or person in the constellation is a fractal
   that repeats itself. When the pattern is repeated in its unique and
   numerous applications, it generates a new field for a paradigm shift.

   A constellation operates in a distinct way. We have explored these
through real-life examples in this book. Here are some features of how a
constellation operates:

   Transformational stewards, leaders, and managers operate the entities in
   a constellation. They are individually and collectively paradigm shifters
   who establish equity and dignity for the well-being of humanity and a
   thriving planet, making this normative through results.
   In the everyday work of the entities and people, they use radical
   transformative processes based on universal values. Every action at
   home and at work is an opportunity to manifest one’s inner capacities
   for self-expression.
   Entities and people engage in learning with the mindset and philosophy
   of enhancing one’s inner and outer development, growth, and evolution
   through life’s journey by BEING in action. Ways to notice growth,
   development, and contribution and systematically process one’s own
   learning with peers creates a culture of continuous lifelong learning,
   openness, and receptivity.
   Each entity and person operates as a radically transformative unit. When
   we discussed mindful implementation in Chapter Seven, one of the
   frameworks for developing and noticing our stages of leadership was
   based on the work of Likert-Emberling. The same principles apply to
   developing radically transformative entities or organizations. In each of
   the five stages of this inseparable continuum, an entity can be organized
   to develop as a paradigm-shifting venture and operate in a wholesome
   and healthy way based on universal values of dignity, equity,
   compassion.
   Radical evolutionary design is a core component of the way entities and
   people operate in a constellation. In Chapter Six, we discussed the
   unique capabilities of a unifying architect and the design templates that
   forge the schema for transformational results.

   Monica Martinez, executive director of Encompass in Santa Cruz
County, California, shares her learning: “I have become increasingly aware
of the way that many well-intended efforts are frequently misaligned with
each other, wasting energy and competing for resources. We all want many
of the same things for our communities; we want equity, dignity, and well-
being for ourselves and others. I now source my efforts from this place,
rather than the bureaucratic systems that I have been trained to navigate.
This motivates me to create new rules to the old game and to do things
differently. I am now working to create alignment among the partners in my
constellation, and I am seeing the transformative results.”
  Tremendous energy and commitment for action is generated by inside-
out leadership, working from who we are and what we deeply care about.
When we combine this energy and commitment for action with
decentralized entities and peer support in a constellation, instead of top-
down leadership and rigid hierarchies, the transformation is unstoppable.
  Here is an example of a constellation.
   Auroville is located in Tamil Nadu, India, and is a universal township
with residents from fifty-five countries. The architecture of Auroville was
designed as a constellation of different entities and people based on the
same purpose and values—residential communities, businesses, services,
farms, and forests, which are largely self-organized. There is no
institutional head or CEO. Stewardship is valued.
   The philosophies of Sri Aurobindo and The Mother (Mirra Alfassa) guide
Auroville. The purpose of Auroville is to realize human unity; the Dream is
inspiring: “There should be somewhere on earth a place which no nation
could claim as its own, where all human beings of goodwill who have a
sincere aspiration could live freely as citizens of the world and obey one
single authority, that of the supreme Truth; a place of peace, concord and
harmony, where all the fighting instincts of man would be used exclusively
to conquer the causes of his suffering and miseries … a place where the
needs of the spirit and the concern for progress would take precedence over
the satisfaction of desires and passions, the search for material enjoyment.”


 Fallacy: If we encourage and establish
 independent/interdependent entities and allow people to self-
 organize, there will be chaos, and people will not know what to
 do. There will be no order; everything will be out of control.
 People always act out of self-interest, so it will be harmful for
 society.
 New Learning: When people embody and act from the universal
 values of dignity, fairness, and compassion, they engage in what
 they care deeply about, self-organize, self-correct, and operate
 as independent yet interdependent entities. Diversity and
 pluralism thrive for the enhancement and joy of all in society.