           Whole-Systems Transformation
Shifting systems and norms to generate results leads to whole-systems
transformation.
 Fallacy: Each discipline, such as engineering, information
 technology, social sciences, and medicine, requires that we
 specialize and advance so that we can create more innovations.
 It is very difficult to work in a multidisciplinary way because our
 frameworks are so different.
 New Learning: The conscious full-spectrum response template
 provides a transdisciplinary framework for multiple disciplines to
 use their technical expertise to solve problems; synergize and
 contribute by shifting systems and norms together; and transcend
 differences by sourcing actions and strategies from universal
 values.


   In this rapidly changing world, we can generate a paradigm shift through
whole-systems change, building on the inner power of human wisdom and
personal transformation. We attune and align for whole-systems
transformation at home, in our workplace, and in society. In the broadest
sense, BEING aligned and attuned within also applies to us as individuals.
   Our daughter-in-law, Anindita, a talented business executive, focuses on
developing the full potential of managers and staff. Her respect for diversity
expresses itself in different spheres and is aligned with her inclusive
worldview. She cares for people, the world of animals, and our earth.
Anindita organized a family vacation in Thailand, and I was inspired by the
stories our grandchildren shared about going to an elephant rescue
sanctuary. Anindita’s exploration of cultural diversity, food, art, and music
informs her creativity. Her professionalism and global perspectives
combined with local sensitivity are valued in her workplace. Both her
personal and professional life are aligned and based on the same core
values.
  Let me return to the work setting. In the different programs we designed
and implemented, we worked with partners from all walks of life. We
designed processes to align our efforts in order to establish synergy; and we
worked in attunement from universal values of dignity and respect, fairness
and equity. The leadership and stewardship learning-in-action programs
foster alignment and connect through attunement grounded in human
dignity, equity, and compassion.
   To reverse the HIV/AIDS epidemic, we had projects to increase treatment,
promote prevention, foster leadership at national and local levels, involve
the media, expand education, and monitor and evaluate the epidemic. Based
on the universal values of dignity and respect, fairness and equity, we
articulated the systems and cultural shifts that aligned the projects and
generated synergy. We agreed on changing the cultural norms that
stigmatized people living with HIV/AIDS in families and communities to
norms that are inclusive and respectful, and altering cultural norms that did
not uphold the responsibility of individuals to have safe sex. We agreed to
change the way systems functioned in order to provide services without
discrimination, and to shift the system for equitable access to medication.
This involved shifting from the profit-driven market determining access to
treatment by unaffordable pricing to more equitable pricing and profits. The
results described earlier in this book are noteworthy.
   An example of alignment and attunement: to address climate change in
Egypt through the United Nations, a transformational leadership program
was designed to develop the capacity of people and experts to mobilize
sustained and effective action. Decision-makers from different sectoral
ministries, scientists, experts, and representatives of civil society
participated in this results-oriented program. The three most important
climate change issues in Egypt were related to water resources, coastal
zones, and agriculture. They were concerned about energy efficiency,
renewable energy, and clean development without pollution.
  The approach and practices of the leadership learning-in-action programs
overcomes fragmentation and leads to synthesis and synergy. In Egypt,
seventy-five participants were engaged in over 125 projects from different
sectors. Each participant mapped every project on the conscious full-
spectrum framework (see Figure 6-3). They mapped the following:

   The inner universal values—what each participant stands for. The very
   foundation of all strategies and actions that create equitable and
   sustainable change is the sourcing of one’s wisdom, one’s inner
   capacity. The participants recognized each other’s potential contribution
   in a different and deeper way, and this was a new foundation in their
   relationships.
   The core values of the project—equity and sustainability. The National
   Communication Reports in Egypt documented the climate change issues
   and stated that equity and sustainability are the foundation of strategic
   action.
   The measurable deliverables—what activities were required to solve the
   problem? As expected, there were hundreds of activities. To name a few,
   participants from civil society were working on educating communities
   and water conservation; the transport sector was looking at ways to
   increase the energy efficiency of transport; the agriculture department
   looked at cropping under conditions of drought as well as sourcing
   renewable energy.
   The systems and norms that needed to shift to make the solution
   sustainable and equitable. These were shared first within smaller
   groups, and then with the entire group. The result was alignment—and
   all the participants could see that.

   Eighty percent of the ideas for shifting systems and norms were about six
similar issues! These ideas included removing import taxes for equipment,
as well as the parts for equipment that were to be used for renewable energy
and clean energy; stopping indirect subsidies to fossil fuel–based goods and
equipment; levying import taxes on goods and equipment that use fossil
fuel directly or indirectly; providing incentives for local initiatives that
promote or use renewable energy as well as energy-efficient and clean
development; revising community education programs by demystifying
science and technology, stimulating local action, and expanding the reach
and making information and education relevant to local situations; and
revamping water distribution and conservation to make it equitable.
   People know what needs to shift—and when we provide safe spaces for
critical thinking, they come up with informed and effective ideas. And when
the participants in Egypt’s climate change discussions became aware of the
alignment in the shifts needed in systems and cultural norms for their
different projects to be sustainable, they could see the interdependence.
They could see that when each project was successful, it created the
conditions for others to succeed. Partnering for synergistic action and
results is both exciting and game-changing. Through their learning in the
leadership program, the participants created a new foundation for equitable
and sustainable change.
   When we initiated the first projects at TISS, the team I worked with,
including Gomathy Balasubramanian, an assistant professor at TISS, chose
three themes: pluralism and democratic decision-making, sustainable
commons, and economic sufficiency. We articulated the systems and
cultural shifts, which became the aligning context for all initiatives.
  For pluralism and democratic decision-making, the focus was on shifting
individuals and societies from inequity because of their identities to
individuals and democratic societies that celebrate pluralism and foster self-
determination, participation, and results-based action.
  Sustainable commons requires a shift from the privatization and
government control of knowledge and the environment to enabling open-
source knowledge repositories, community resource banks, and
mechanisms for sustainable community stewardship of commons and
regeneration of the environment.
   Economic sufficiency requires a shift from the commodification of
human beings and depriving them access to resources essential for life and
livelihoods to honoring the human spirit and life, valuing labor, ensuring
fair wages, and providing social security and access to capital and markets.
   Gomathy shares, “The first thing I do differently in any engagement now
is to work from all three areas: inner values, critical systems thinking, and
results-based conversations. In the past, these were often held in a broken
way, with one becoming more important than the other. Now I habitually
examine all my current engagements from this holistic lens.
   “I have been part of the radical feminist movement for many years
because of my firm commitment to justice. I also explored the nature of
self, communities, and organizations, through various philosophies and
theories, such as management, organizational behavior. In these spaces, I
found that there was no reflexivity on structural inequalities such as gender,
caste, class, and how they determine human behavior. In the last five years
of work in TISS using these transformative methods, I have been able to
bring together these various experiences into a larger whole, to articulate
my sense of justice not as per what a given ideology says, but as an
embodied self, confronting complex realities. Also, this embodiment is no
longer limited to conversations but in concrete action and engagements. In
that sense, being just for me has become a lived adventure rather than a set
of critical internal and external norms.”
                   The Importance of Language
The tools, techniques, and approaches of the stewardship and leadership
programs are profound and often easier to grasp in one’s mother tongue.
The TISS team generated results in the town of Nagapattinam with
community members because we translated all the materials of the
stewardship programs into Tamil. In Auroville, all the stewardship
programs were bilingual—English and Tamil. The translation team was
such fun to work with—Srilatha, Suriyaprakash, Muthu, and Adya! We
worked many hours every evening after the days’ sessions, and their
continuous humor, laughter, and banter kept the energy flowing. In this
work, translation cannot be literal—it must be rigorous and convey the
meaning of the English words and phrases. Translating it back into English
and checking that with me, pretesting it in the field, using new words to
communicate new insights, finding or creating new words to move beyond
religious interpretations, were all part of the process.
   Suriyaprakash C. is a professor at the Jansons School of Business. He
says, “The stewardship tools provide me a new paradigm to approach my
work as a teacher, trainer, facilitator. The centrality of value-based design of
projects has propelled me to design my organization development programs
to create tangible outcomes. I extensively use the conscious full-spectrum
design framework, which I call the Integrated OD Framework, and the
transformational results chain with my organizational trainees. In turn they
design their own breakthrough initiatives using the templates. This is a
practical and effective full-spectrum approach to organizational change.”
   Because we translated our work into Tamil, it was possible to work along
the Nagapattinam coast in Tamil Nadu, India, with Legal Aid to Women
(LAW) Trust and Social Need Education and Human Awareness (SNEHA).
They have been instrumental in mobilizing communities on livelihoods,
disaster response, human rights of women, children, and marginalized
communities, health, and strengthening of community-based organizations.
One of the biggest struggles has been their campaign toward securing the
rights of traditional fishing communities over coastal resources. Dignity,
human rights, and living in harmony with nature are their core values. They
work to establish a just society that is free of discrimination based on caste,
class, religion, gender, language, and age through social transformation with
people’s participation.
   A. Gandhimathi, director of LAW Trust, is unstoppable. She stands for
inner freedom for herself and others and manifests this through her work by
reaching out to the most marginalized communities in the coastal districts
of Tamil Nadu. She is committed, burns for justice, and acts. Resources
may be minimal, and it may not seem possible, but that does not stop her
from persevering and finding other solutions for justice and well-being in
communities. Gandhimathi says, “My freedom lies in the freedom of
others.”
   Jesu Rethinam, director of SNEHA, is an embodiment of humility and
courage working with and for marginalized and affected communities along
the coast of Tamil Nadu. She is a trusted and respected person in the
community, based on her commitment, results, and passion. She is always
ready to do more, learn more, and keep up to date with what is needed for
herself and her team to deliver results.
  In many countries where we worked, we painstakingly translated this
work—for example, we translated it into Arabic with Ehab and Heba.
   Pinaki Roy says, “The most important opportunity that emerged since I
joined the Stewardship for New Emergence journey is translating the tools
into Bengali. This is an extremely important step because it becomes
accessible to members of marginalized and rural communities in Bengal;
gives them tools and processes to consciously participate and decide on
transformational development priorities for themselves; and allows them to
be active agents of change.” Pinaki was working in villages in the
Sundarbans in West Bengal—which has the world’s largest mangrove
forest.
 Fallacy: Whole-systems transformation is a complex process
 that experts and systems analysts have to work on.
 New Learning: When we articulate the systems and cultural
 shifts needed for problems to be solved in an equitable and
 sustainable way, and align our work toward accomplishing these
 shifts based on universal values, we are putting the pieces of the
 puzzle together for whole-systems transformation and results.