
 Fallacy: All activists are basically angry, have a chip on their
 shoulder, and simply put up resistance. They benefit from the
 systems and structures that have been set up. Corporations
 provide jobs.
 New Learning: Activists care; and so do other people who may
 not identify themselves as activists. They see the systems,
 structures, and cultural norms that are not working. Most of us
 have derived benefit from current systems.
 Corporations have benefited tremendously from public sector
 investments and efforts such as infrastructure development,
 expertise, and education. There are mindful pro-activists in every
 sector, and the new generation of movements is not about “us
 versus them.” It is about calling out the unworkable systems and
 cultural norms and generating alternatives based on universal
 values.


   The next generation of movements and campaigns is emerging. It sources
everyone’s greatness and inner capacities; it transforms systems and cultural
norms to presence equity and sustainability; and it solves problems with
enduring results. This work requires great humility, but it also requires great
courage. Often, we have to work in spaces and places where people are
resistant and have vested interests. It is about creating different spaces of
deep, universal value-based grounding simultaneously with analytical,
strategic thinking, which will generate equitable and sustainable results for
a paradigm shift.
  With the ever-increasing numbers of people in the world, it seems
impossible to make a difference by reaching just a few people. It is
encouraging to know that when we reach a tipping point, a critical mass is
attained, which is a threshold for a result or condition to occur. In other
words, we do not need to reach everybody—we need to have a critical
mass. According to one study, once a minority opinion of committed agents
grows beyond 10 percent of the majority population, the minority opinion
becomes the majority opinion more quickly.68
   The challenge in the world today is not one of natural resources, or
money, or human capital, or technology, or legislation. It is not merely a
question of implementation of laws and distribution systems, nor can things
be “fixed” merely by providing education for all. Clearly something more
foundational and profound is missing. We need to change our mindsets; we
need to redefine development and our materialistic way of life; we need to
rethink our narrow and rigid identities.
   Radical transformational leadership is emerging as a cutting-edge, new-
generation approach to transforming our mindsets—but only if we choose
to do so. This approach is based on the understanding that people have inner
potential and capacity to wisely and effectively address their challenges. It
also recognizes that the root factors of social and economic injustice are
within individuals, and these have to be addressed and transformed using
appropriate processes. It is a new kind of leadership for a transformed
future: leaders who manifest the deeper convergence of principles, purpose,
and practice to generate concrete results that benefit all of humanity and our
planet.
           PART 4
MOVING AHEAD ON THIS JOURNEY
                          Chapter 12
       Ushering in the Age of Universal
                  Prosperity
      What Will It Take? A Call to Action
   Again and again someone in the crowd wakes up, he has no ground in
   the crowd, and he emerges according to much broader laws. He carries
   strange customs with him and demands room for bold gestures. The
   future speaks ruthlessly through him.
                                                  RAINER MARIA RILKE
Each and every one of us has a contribution to make in our family,
workplace, or community, or in the world. It does not matter where. What
matters is that we are united in our commitment to serve others through our
actions. Human beings, when they stand in their inner greatness, united in
commitment, are unstoppable. Our commitment to embody our full
potential and take action to benefit others is the way to create a world in
which we all thrive. This is when transformation occurs.
   In the midst of the many benefits technology has brought about—
increased life expectancy, higher levels of education, energy in our homes,
connections through the internet, access to materials, employment—one out
of every six of us in this world lives on the very brink of survival.
   The escalation of conflicts, violence, and inequities is a marker of
disastrous human-made decisions globally. United Nations Secretary-
General António Guterres opened a UN Human Rights Council session in
2017 by calling disregard for human rights “a disease that is spreading” and
urged the council to be part of the cure. “We are increasingly seeing the
perverse phenomenon of populism and extremism feeding off each other in
a frenzy of growing racism, xenophobia, anti-Semitism, anti-Muslim hatred
and other forms of intolerance,” he said. “Minorities, indigenous
communities and others face discriminations and abuse across the world,”
he added, noting abuse targeting refugees and migrants, and people who are
lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, and/or intersex (LGBTI).69
  There is a way out of this.
   Radical transformational leadership is an idea whose time has come. It is
robust, but nascent, and is still in the margins of mainstream activity in
every sector. Most communities, institutions, organizations, and countries
are still unaware or unexposed to its power and potential. Vested interest
groups fight to maintain the status quo and strongly resist change. This is
the challenge. As the disparity, intolerance, and runaway greed of
individuals and nations continue to grow, how do we strategize to
mainstream this work around the world?
   This radical evolutionary response has unique features that apply to all of
us. These features are more like axioms—they are established, accepted,
and self-evidently true. When we source our inner capacities for strategic
action, when we are emotionally intelligent and self-aware, and committed
to a thriving world, we manifest transformative results as we unfold in
action, and new patterns are put in place. It is our choice to engage in this
adventure of life.
      Axioms of Radical Transformational Leadership

Axiom 1. It’s Everyone’s Realm
This work allows us to see that our personal selves are not separate from
our professional and political selves, and that everyone can contribute to
radical transformation. Change is possible by starting where you are
standing, by designing for results with specificity, and by doing things
differently. Each of us has the power to make a difference no matter what
level of formal or informal leadership role we have, in the way we nurture
our families and the conversations we shift in society.
   We all have the three innate, life-enhancing attributes that we can touch
and access: our universal heart of compassion; empathetic burning for
justice or fairness—our “equity impulse”; and our discerning eye, which
can see both invisible and visible patterns with light and pristine clarity.
When we cultivate our emotional intelligence—self-awareness, our ability
to regulate our emotions that are ever so often unruly and life-diminishing,
and transcend our rigid defense mechanisms—we manifest our innate life-
enhancing attributes in our families, work, and society and generate
transformative results.
   The people you have met throughout this book are from countries around
the world, they follow different faiths, and they have different expertise and
proficiencies. They work in various sectors. They are ordinary people
making extraordinary contributions. They are each activating the three life-
enhancing attributes, and using that power to do things differently and
generate results.
  Will you answer the call? Will you step into your full potential and take
action on behalf of people and our planet?

Axiom 2. The Prosperity Fractal
Let us think of prosperity as a state of BEING individually and collectively
in which we manifest our full potential, flourish, and thrive—and have our
basic needs of survival met. It is the vitality and contentment of self-
expression. Prosperity is about well-being for all—not growth, opulence,
luxury, or comfort.
   Prosperity is success redefined. It creates cultural value for thriving for
all, instead of valuing unlimited opulence and money as the beacon of
success. The prosperity fractal repeats the pattern—it is the simplest of
everyday actions as well as gigantic endeavors and enterprises.
   We have choices. We can continue to find “fixes” for our problems, never
addressing the factors that give rise to these problems. We can continue to
implement partial responses to complex issues—brutal violence, climate
change, crisis in the financial system, inequalities, unemployment, unmet
basic needs, to name a few—knowing that such responses rarely make
significant impact or generate the change we wish to see. Or, we can choose
to design and implement conscious full-spectrum responses to solve our
dire problems while radically transforming systems and cultural norms,
sourcing our inner capacities, thereby moving the whole, addressing not just
the immediate problems but that which gives rise to them. These are the
conditions of sustainable change. As we create opportunities for people to
manifest their full potential, at the same time we must respond to basic
needs for all.
  What we must do has never been done before, and the scale at which we
must do this is unprecedented. But humans with compassion, courage, and
ingenuity have responded to crisis before. Let us assume we will do so
again!
   Citizens, policy-makers, politicians, journalists, corporate leaders, are
you willing to take your family, work, and niche in the world, and dive into
the adventure of a new emergence? To dive in where you are not “in
control,” but anchored in your inner capacities? Are you willing and able to
create new patterns of prosperity as fractals of the whole?