
 Fallacy: People—policy-makers and citizens alike—must
 understand all the systems, structures, dynamics, and history of
 the different disempowering isms because they are so different.
 We need a thorough understanding before taking action.
 New Learning: The key to interrupting entrenched isms is to
 source the universal values of dignity, equity, and compassion,
 transcending our ego and loosening the grip of our exclusionary
 social identities. The root factors of all isms are the same, though
 their expressions may be different.
 We need to act based on what we know—understand the
 systems, structures, dynamics, and history of the different
 disempowering isms in order to take appropriate measures—and
 these measures will change as contexts change. Understanding
 is a necessary but not sufficient condition to interrupt isms.
             BEING a Radical Transformer
Radical transformers manifest the triple helix of our innate intertwined
attributes—universal heart of compassion, equity impulse, discerning eye
seeing patterns—in order to BE the contemporary pioneer, unifying
architect, and mindful pro-activist simultaneously. They act at scale.
   When we touch the deeper side of ourselves, something opens up to the
universe and we give unstintingly, accessing our compassion and our
humanity. We hold self-awareness, our inner power, our courage and
compassion, our spirituality as an essential foundation for a thriving
humanity. We give of ourselves because we care and because we realize we
are interconnected, part of a larger interdependent whole. Caring and
willingness to give are essential, but they are not sufficient for shifting
cultural norms and systems that lead to inequity and rectify the injustices of
the world—we need to act.
   Radical transformers care deeply and source universal values for action
at scale in order to generate a paradigm shift. They address the three key
issues underpinning many of the crises in the world today—inequity,
exclusion based on our social and other identities, and the current economic
and financial systems, which we noted in Part One of this book. Scale
requires us to design programs to transform these three underpinning
factors with new policies, norms, systems, and structures and with policy-
makers, businesses, and communities.
    A Radical Transformer Disrupts Social Norms That
      Maintain Inequity, Exploitation, and Exclusion
B. R. Ambedkar said, “Political tyranny is nothing compared to the social
tyranny and a reformer who defies society is a more courageous man than a
politician who defies Government.” Ambedkar was an Indian jurist,
economist, politician, and social reformer who campaigned against social
discrimination of Dalits. He supported the rights of women and labor rights,
and said decades ago, “I measure the progress of a community by the
degree of progress which women have achieved.”
  Ambedkar was the principal architect of the Constitution of India and
was independent India’s first law minister. He was the first Indian to earn a
doctorate overseas. His doctorates were in economics from both Columbia
University and the London School of Economics. His legacy as a social and
political reformer continues to influence India’s social and economic
policies.
   Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar was born into a poor Dalit family in 1891.
Dalits were treated as “untouchables,” and children had to sit outside the
classroom. A century ago—and even today—Dalits were not allowed to eat
or drink water with people from so-called “higher” castes, or even touch the
water or food, or the containers for water or food. When children in school
needed to drink water, someone from a higher caste had to pour that water
from a height; if the attendant was not available, then children had to go
without water. Ambedkar wrote about this in his writing “No Peon, No
Water” (a peon is an office or school attendent).
   This was more than a one hundred years ago, and although India today
has made progress, such discrimination still exists in many parts of the
country. You met Raju in Chapter Six, who still faced discrimination in his
school in the twenty-first century. He and other Dalit children could not
drink water from the same water fountain as children from the so-called
upper castes, and often had to be in school without water. Raju had the
courage to take steps to transform the discrimination at his school.
  Like any other ism, the way to interrupt casteism is by authentically
embracing everyone irrespective of their caste, sourcing our oneness and
embodying universal values for action.
   Ambedkar, often referred to as the father of India’s Constitution, was
voted as “The Greatest Indian” in 2012 with 20 million votes in a poll
organized by History TV18 and CNN-IBN.54 Ambedkar said, “Political
democracy cannot last unless there lies at the base of it social democracy.
What does social democracy mean? It means a way of life which recognizes
liberty, equality and fraternity as the principles of life.… What is required is
a profound and thorough conviction of the justice, necessity and importance
of political and social rights.” He believed strongly in individual freedom.
   Although many reading this book may not be active politicians, social
transformation that presences universal dignity and equity is vitally
important for each one of us, our children, and our grandchildren; it is at the
core of a vibrant democracy. Ambedkar is a profound inspiration for radical
transformers everywhere. He transcended exclusionary social norms, not
with hatred, but with a deep knowing of the yearning of the human spirit to
be free and live with dignity. He discerned with pristine clarity root factors
in our social institutions, culture, and people that created disempowering
isms and invited everyone to join hands to address equality and dignity for
women, disenfranchised groups, and those who lived in poverty. He
navigated complex social and political systems and power dynamics
without petty, superficial rhetoric and tactics. He prepared the Constitution
of India based on universal values of social, economic, and political justice;
liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith, and worship; equality of status
and of opportunity; and fraternity, assuring the dignity of the individual.
  It is up to each one of us living in a democracy to BE deeply self-aware,
embody these values instead of simply talking about them, manifest them in
action for equitable and sustainable results. This applies to other
democracies in the world, and to people who are working for universal
dignity and equity.
        A Radical Transformer Faces the Resistance
Our transformative personal practices and who we are BEING anchor
societal and planetary transformation. And when we are committed to
transforming inequitable, exploitative, and exclusionary systems and
cultural norms that maintain the status quo, we should expect pushback. A
few people with vested interests will resist change. Although most people
want change, they are often very uncomfortable because they are not sure
what will emerge and find it difficult to engage in the adventure of
uncertainty. Uncertainty conjures up fears in our minds; we feel “out of
control” because many of us have an assumption that we can control what
happens to us and our children; in reality, we cannot control life’s events.
   Stakeholders and participants in learning-in-action programs consistently
come up with an observation: people in their organizations or their partners
do not understand nor appreciate the breakthroughs they generate. There are
at least two aspects to this seeming indifference. First, our own vision limits
what we can see. When human beings do not engage in their own unfolding
based on their inner capacities and the universal values they stand for, they
do not distinguish business as usual from transformative action—they do
not have the lens to see, perceive, and appreciate the inclusiveness and
depth of what is happening.
  Second, in our competitive world, we should not expect people to clap
when we are successful. Joyfully celebrating another’s success requires a
healthy sense of self, profound humility, and selfless generosity. We are the
ones who gain most by our contribution, because we give the fullest
expression to our whole selves and experience the joy of BEING in action
with results.
   As long as we make incremental changes on the margin without rocking
the boats heavy with vested interests and give as charity only (instead of
giving as mutual empowerment), we are unlikely to face resistance. But the
moment we stand in universal values such as dignity, compassion, and
equity, and work with the inner capacities with everyone to create new
patterns and new rules of the game, some people are threatened.
   Those who are threatened realize that when people engage from this
powerful inner space of universal values, people will not allow themselves
to be manipulated. Leaders in business, politics, media, academia,
government and nongovernmental organizations know that the missing
piece is the opportunity to source our inner capacities for strategic action
and results. However, they generally do not invest in creating this
opportunity, carrying on business as usual but expecting different results.
People in leadership positions are often afraid they will lose control—this is
also the case in families.
   We expect resistance—resistance is an indicator that we are pushing the
envelope and rattling the status quo. New ideas and approaches take time to
seed—but that is no reason for anyone to give up. And it is vital to establish
strategies to openly support principled risk-takers—we noted this in
Chapter Six, when we reviewed synergistic operational strategies.
         A Radical Transformer Transcends Burnout
In institutions with high expectations and deadlines, people experience
fatigue and even physical and mental collapse due to overwork and stress.
We often refer to this as burnout, but in this transformative work, we
differentiate being tired, overworked, and stressed from being burned out.
Burnout is the frustration of having to face resistance. When we commit
and act to generate equitable and sustainable results and face constant
pushback and resistance, it may be hard to keep going.
   Active burnout shows up as frustration and anger. Passive burnout shows
up as withdrawal and resignation. How can we prevent burnout? When we
constantly source our stand and inner capacities for action, we are able to
transcend our reactivity and frustration. We relate to resistance not as
something wrong or bad but as an inevitable part of change. Generating and
sustaining community engagement in the face of resistance is vital. We
work with partners in a way that they are able to initiate and sustain action,
transcend positional differences, and recommit to their stand and inner
capacity as the source of strategic action. BEING courageous in spite of
fears and knowing that we are bigger than any fear keeps us engaged.
   I learned to internalize the tenet of impermanence through the discourses
of S. N. Goenka during Vipassana meditation retreats. Nothing is permanent
in life. It is a relief to realize that the resistances we face shall pass too—
like everything else. Knowing impermanence deep within ourselves
cultivates endurance, enhances our ability to be “unmessable with,” and
makes us unstoppable.
   During a stewardship program, participants working for social justice
expressed their deep frustration about multiple obstacles, including inertia
and apathy. In one instance, a participant had spent years in a city in India
bringing Hindus and Muslims together who worked harmoniously on social
issues, and then a donor suddenly decided to give money to one group,
driving a separative wedge into the community. She was devastated.
   We spent time “rebooting” ourselves. Change agents inevitably face
setbacks in their work on social justice and human rights. In order to go
beyond their frustration, it is essential to reconnect to our larger purpose
and notice changes that we have made even when it seems hopeless and we
think we failed! We reconnected with what we stood for—the universal
values that guided our actions. Participants articulated their purpose and
contribution: How will I live my life, knowing I will die? We spoke of what
had been accomplished even when it felt like nothing much had been
achieved: the widespread awareness citizens gained because of campaigns
related to social justice, financing, ending homelessness; Muslim and Hindu
women taking the initiative to establish social networks and support groups
without donor funds.
   We identified seeming dichotomies and worked together to deepen the
conversation, anchoring ourselves in universal values in order to transcend
them: How do we work collectively versus the individual need to
contribute? How do we foster openness without the work getting derailed
by people who wish to maintain status quo? We must be able to transcend
social identity constructs, and simultaneously actively engage in anti-
oppression work dealing with social reality. When we notice personal
contradictions, we continue with our commitment, knowing we are human
and not perfect. How can we transcend these dichotomies and navigate into
a vibrant future without compromising universal values of dignity, fairness,
and compassion?
   Taking into account the new principles and contexts that emerged
through our exploration, participants redesigned projects or formulated new
initiatives using transformative design templates (CFSR, TRC, SOS). It was
renewing for everyone to articulate what participants were going to offer
and the results they would generate in the future. They articulated steps to
nurture themselves and thought about options and places where they could
manifest their full potential.
   As we will see in Chapter Ten, radical transformers are contemporary
pioneers, unifying architects, principled game changers, and mindful pro-
activists who establish the strategic tapestry of action at scale to shift the
paradigm. In Chapter Eleven, we will look at how radical transformers
skillfully align and attune with partners and institutions to generate
equitable and sustainable results, overcoming silos and fragmentation and
leveraging transformation.
                          Chapter 10
               Responding at Scale
          The Strategic Tapestry of Scale
   The future is not some place we are going to, but one we are creating.
   The paths to it are not found, but made; and the activity of making them
   changes both the maker and the destination.
                                                            JOHN SCHAAR
For responses to be effective at scale, it is necessary to use approaches and
methods that generate synergy and coherence and are mutually reinforcing.
In Chapter Six, we worked with three templates for designing
transformational projects, initiatives, or ideas for action and results: the
conscious full-spectrum response (CFSR), synergistic operational strategies
(SOS), and the transformational results chain (TRC). In this chapter, we
will take these templates to the next stage of design and implementation.
We will also explore the ways that interdependent entities are connected in
a constellation that manifests universal values for a thriving humanity and
planet.
  When our projects take root and start generating some results, we add the
next four synergistic operational strategies, as we continue the first four.
These stage-two strategies are listed in Table 10-1.
            Table 10-1. Synergistic Operational Strategies: Stage 1 and Stage 2.