Citizens’ Capacity for Building Thriving Democracies
There is untapped energy in the realm of measurement for change. So far,
measurement has been the domain of policy-makers, experts, and scholars.
Today, citizens can shape their opinions based on the information they
receive; but this is inadequate to generate momentum for well-being. As
citizens, we need to think more deeply in order to understand what is behind
the sound bites we hear; we need to inform ourselves more accurately about
the systems and cultural issues, and go a few steps further to drive change
in the direction of a thriving humanity and planet.
   With so much information being pushed through the media and
advertising, it is increasingly difficult for us to know what is reliable and
differentiate it from the power- and profit-motive propaganda. The
corporations and groups who choose not to be socially responsible—
although social responsibility is everyone’s business—support studies and
information to promote their positions. They sponsor a few willing scholars
as well as selected nonprofit organizations with seemingly laudable mission
statements—making it even more confusing and misleading for citizens.59
Only when we radically shift our mindset and choose to leave a world that
is better than we found it for our children and the following generations,
instead of responding to the shortsighted immediate gratification of our
unending wants, will we make the necessary effort to understand metrics
and measurement and use data differently.
   The focus on popularity in present times is a distraction from what is
important and often rests on superficial measures, such as how many times
a song was heard or a person quoted. These outputs have little to do with
the changes we wish to see—music that is uplifting and life-enhancing or
responsible citizens and ethical leadership. Cultures and citizens in different
parts of the world need to value norms and measures that are in consonance
with a thriving humanity and planet.
   The first step is to inquire into what we deeply care about and the
universal values we stand for; and then to use this as the foundation for
inquiry to see whether our strategies and measures are moving in the
direction of a thriving humanity and planet. Some of these inquiries are
listed earlier in this section. Thinking critically and understanding the
dynamics of the vested interests of particular groups who maintain the
status quo at the cost of people’s well-being is no longer an option—it is an
imperative. Developing the ability to inform ourselves from authentic
sources of data is in our own interest and essential for future generations to
thrive. Numerous indices attempt to provide us with information, and
citizens need to know and understand exactly what indicators are used to
formulate these indices. This may seem complex at first, but it becomes
clearer and comprehensible when we start informing ourselves. An index is
a composite statistic—a compound measure that aggregates multiple
indicators. An index summarizes and ranks specific observations and is
used to advocate for change. For example, the Human Development Index
ranks countries and measures enhanced human capabilities—long and
healthy life span, extent of knowledge, decent standard of life. It also
measures the conditions necessary for human development, such as
participation in political and community life, human security and rights,
environmental sustainability, equity, and justice. The Human Development
Index is formulated to promote the well-being of all people.60
   The Global Peace Index comprises twenty-three indicators, which
measure such factors as violence, internal conflicts, ease of access to small
arms, military expenditures, and import and export of weapons. They also
measure peace—the attitudes, institutions, and structures that create and
sustain peaceful societies.61 The Green Transition Scoreboard, an ongoing
research project, in 2017 revealed an increase in green energy investments
and commitments worldwide—$8.13 trillion since 2007.62
  However, there are indices that claim to benefit countries and people, but
seem to drive change in a particular direction on behalf of only a few
people. For example, an index on economic freedom is mostly about
intellectual property rights, limiting government spending, and even more
unregulated markets. This index does not consider economic opportunities,
decent work, and well-being for all people.
   It is imperative that we inform ourselves of what comprises an index and
understand the trajectory of a future if we use that particular index to inform
our opinions, make demands, formulate strategies, or make decisions. It is
crucial that we question the answers we are given; and that we question
these answers from the perspective of equity and sustainability.
  Our opinions and assertions matter when they are based on accurate
measurement and information as well as the universal values we stand for.
They strengthen democracy and create new societal conversations beyond
unexamined ideological positions.
   We have enough studies and data that establish beyond doubt that all
human beings at our deepest core value self-worth and dignity, fairness, and
equity and are capable of compassionate action.63 Appropriate metrics and
measurement will create momentum and shift the current narratives for a
thriving humanity and planet to emerge.

New Narratives for New Systems and Norms
   What we “see” is what we say.
   And, what we measure is what we move.
Our lenses color what we see. To generate new narratives, we need to take
off our blinders and open up our compassionate hearts and radical minds so
that we can actually see the emerging icons who are shifting the paradigm.
   We must distinguish the ways in which stories are currently told from
narratives that generate paradigm shifts. Too often, we write about what we
see directly, but without seeing the related patterns, and we miss
opportunities to generate transformative actions. Having deeper
conversations with people, inquiring about what they are doing (outputs),
and connecting their actions to outcomes and impact—the changes they are
making through their actions—stimulates people to see their contribution to
the big picture. It is exciting to see people connecting the dots and realizing
the difference they are making. Deepening the inquiry focuses on what
really matters to people—the outcomes and impacts they want to
accomplish in their lives—and is empowering.
  Generating conversations that go beyond the mundane and offer the
opportunity for everyone to access and articulate their own inner power,
asking people what they care about, acknowledging them for their deeper
commitment behind what they do, moves us all toward creative action.
   Jessica Underwood Varma, an actress, singer, and educator at the
Tenement Museum in New York City, was part of our leadership programs
in New York in 2009. Jessica shares, “The core of who I am, what the Sufi
poet Rumi called ‘the deep root of your being,’ has not changed, because it
was always there. I burn for dignity not just for myself but for all people
and for the planet on which we live.” Jessica noticed the difference in the
way she guided tours at the Tenement Museum. “After the learning-in-
action programs, I now have a rich environment at the museum in which to
apply everything I learned. The potential is huge: a growing institution with
an increasing visitorship. I decided to give a different kind of tour, making
the systems and patterns that shape our lives, usually seen by a few, visible
to everyone. For example, I ask children on the tour how and where their T-
shirt or backpack was made, and by whom. It is amazing how children
understand systems and patterns! I create an experience that shifts my
visitors from a passive state to an active, socially conscious one.
   “I remember one tour in particular. A representative from a foundation
was one of my visitors. At the end of the tour, his mind was made up, and
the museum got a grant of $500,000.
   “I feel inspired sharing this story now, looking back on how far I have
come. My learning has completely transformed how I embark on strategic
action, how I lead and partner with people, my approach to problem
solving, and how I view the world. Nothing is the way it is because ‘that’s
just the way it is.’ People create systems and cultural norms, and systems
and cultures can always be shifted.”
  We need to emphasize conscious full-spectrum approaches, instead of
narratives reflecting partial responses. Many stories that inspire us are
anchored in dignity, equity, compassion, and courage. These new and
exciting narratives challenge existing systems and norms as we solve
problems; but these connections and shifts are often implicit. Making them
explicit generates new societal conversations and influences our policies,
strategies, and politics.
  Stories of acts of kindness and bravery inspire us too. In organizations,
“best practices” describe some successful aspects of projects and initiatives,
which can be interesting. These may be important, but they are incomplete
building blocks for a paradigm shift. We must be able to distinguish and
document efforts that create some results from the efforts that create a
paradigm shift. The paradigm shift in today’s context means equitable and
enduring well-being and dignity for all human beings and a thriving planet.
    Artists and the Media Transforming Narratives and
                       Leadership
Artists, writers, and the media interpret the world for us. They are capable
of constructing new social realities and inspiring action. The reach and role
of mass media, social media, and artists—writers, filmmakers, visual and
performing artists, theater directors—in responding to any issue and setting
the tone for global and nationwide conversations is unparalleled.
   In programs through the United Nations, including the maternal mortality
reduction program in South Asia and the global effort to reverse the
HIV/AIDS program—we engaged with media professionals and artists.
They were a critical part of the response. They participated in the learning-
in-action programs in different countries. Artists and media professionals
were leaders in their own right, and at the same time, they supported
emerging value-based leadership throughout the different echelons of
society.
   Artists and the media in Africa, the Arab States, Asia, Eastern Europe,
and Latin America and the Caribbean created an abundance of richly
textured and insightful songs, poems, plays, music, and writing that
reflected the personal transformation through which they as participants in
learning-in-action programs had journeyed. These works revealed the new
reality from which artists were BEING, thinking, and doing. They moved
from images of blame, death, and overwhelming destruction to new images
with symbols, icons, and metaphors that portrayed strength, resilience, and
caring. Artists and media professionals understood the cultural norms that
fueled the spread of the HIV/AIDS epidemic and committed to being
proactive partners in the response.
   Gulan Kripalani, a leadership practitioner, coach, and media professional,
was part of our team to reverse the HIV/AIDS epidemic. She had worked in
advertising and as a theater artist. She reflects: “I am self-aware so I can
align my principles and actions. I learned about how my values underpin
how I live and work. I learned that I too can inspire people.
   “I believe this is the only methodology that I have experienced that is
capable of making real, sustainable change and delivering results. Without
the conscious full-spectrum response, we will always have millions of well-
meaning projects but can never create equitable and sustainable change.
This way of designing can transform individuals, communities, institutions,
and nations. This methodology can be taken to scale to change systems and
cultural norms that keep people and communities in a constant state of
being exploited and oppressed.
   “I believe passionately in gender equity and social justice, in respect for
all. My work has been transformed because of my learning. I now see
societal patterns and interconnectedness much more clearly. I feel that had I
not encountered this approach, I might have become part of the millions of
‘project planning’ brigades. This work has strengthened my resolve to work
more strategically, and I feel my contribution can make a difference through
the many different ways I engage in society—as a leadership coach in
businesses, NGOs, and civil society and as an artist.”
   An example from India today, beyond the United Nations: Rintu Thomas
and Sushmit Ghosh are young, talented, and committed filmmakers who
founded Black Ticket Films. Rintu and Sushmit describe their work as
follows: “We want to express the power we are. We tell stories of
transformation that highlight the good that exists in the world and challenge
those paradigms that stop people from achieving their full potential. We
stand for justice, dignity, and equity for every being, and we work toward
creating a thriving planet, where there is reverence for all life. We want to
produce films that show the world the pathways of transformation.”
  Fallacy: Media professionals are trained and skilled. They should
  always write facts from a neutral point of view. And in the world of
  advertising, media professionals should be creative about
  promoting the products and services for which they have been
  hired, irrespective of the consequences on people or the planet.
  They have to write what their audience wants! Leadership
  development and universal values are irrelevant and have
  nothing to do with media professionals.
  New Learning: Media professional need to report facts. The
  universal values of dignity, equity, and compassion are essential
  for every human being to manifest their full potential, including
  media professionals. What they see see influences how they
  choose to lead their lives and what they report, write, and
  document, which in turn shapes the mindsets of people and the
  trajectory of the future of humanity and our planet.
  Transformational stewardship development is of paramount
  importance for media professionals too. Responsible media and
  advertising is critical for a thriving humanity and planet.