
   My own learning journeys have combined technical expertise and
personal development with social transformation. I feel privileged that
chance created opportunities for me to work with and learn from eminent
leaders in the health sector who cared deeply for humanity—Carl Taylor,
Vulimiri Ramalingaswami, Halfdan Mahler. Working with James Grant, the
former executive director of UNICEF, was a tremendous learning
experience. When I worked as the global child health advisor at UNICEF,
his results-oriented, strategic directions and expectations from UNICEF
staff stretched me to my fullest potential.
   I was recruited to UNICEF in 1988. Within two weeks, when my
supervisor, Rolf Carriere, asked me what I needed to do my job well, I
replied, “Space to innovate and trust.” His response intrigued me: “If that is
what you need, you have to find it yourself. You have been recruited to lead
the immunization program, and you are expected to deliver results.” I
embarked on yet another dimension of learning, systematically participating
in various personal development programs and integrating that learning into
my life at work and at home.
  Rolf Carriere created the milieu for team learning and development. He
believed that personal development combined with technical expertise
would foster initiative and generate results. The results were significant:
innovations to reduce childhood mortality, address child labor, improve the
quality of education in schools in Bangladesh. We also created a culture of
growth, learning, and responsibility in our workplace.
  Development of competence and mastery is not a final end state but a
continuous process of learning, discovering, and applying that to life and
work.
        Developing and Utilizing Capacity: Examples
Participants in leadership programs are equipped to use a combination of
cutting-edge methodologies to inspire action, design for action at scale,
produce breakthrough results, and coach others and engender
transformation in order to generate results in different programs—reducing
maternal and child mortality, halting and reversing HIV/AIDS, stopping
female genital mutilation, preventing violence, and conserving our habitats.
   For example, Chika Saito, chief advisor of a JICA (Japan International
Cooperation Agency) pro-poor project in Lagos, Nigeria, was part of our
team at the United Nations to reverse the HIV/AIDS epidemic. Her
perseverance and commitment are inspiring. She is on a journey of
continuous learning and application. She deepened her learning of
leadership competencies, is now a certified master practitioner and coach in
neuro-linguistic programming, and trained further as a professional
psychological counselor accredited by the Japanese Organization of Mental
Health and Educational Agencies. In the different programs that Chika leads
to mitigate poverty and enhance health, she applies her expertise for
realizing human rights, building strategic alliances, and creating a work
environment where each staff member is respected and stimulated to be
creative.
   Sanjeev Ranganathan designed and leads Aura Auro Design and STEM
Land for education in rural India. STEM is the acronym for science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics. Sanjeev participated in one of
our learning-in-action programs. He says, “My learning from the
stewardship workshops was significant in the creation of Aura Auro. A new
kind of institution, based on the universal values I stand for, came to me as
an insight and a breakthrough initiative; and thanks to the stewardship
workshop, I put it into action.”
   Sanjeev designed Aura Auro as a socially conscious business. Their
partner, Aura Semiconductor, is a fabless semiconductor company focused
on using its product development expertise to evolve as a leading
semiconductor company in India. This provides Sanjeev and the engineers
on his team interaction and benchmarks with technology leaders and
increases the need for their skills to be on par with any design group in the
world.
   Sanjeev knows the importance of developing the capacity of his team,
creating opportunities for them to utilize their learning and nurture their
growth. The STEM Land and Aura Auro team consists of five committed,
talented, action- and results-oriented, practice-based, fun-loving engineers
—Arun Surya, Bala Anand, Naveen Kumar, Sundranandhan
Kothandaraman, and Vaidegi Gunasekar. Everyone on his team participated
in the Stewardship for New Emergence programs designed and delivered by
me in Auroville. These learning-in-action programs enhance skills,
competencies, and inner capacities to design and deliver conscious full-
spectrum projects. Subsequently, the STEM Land team generated ideas for
transformation and embarked on new initiatives. For example, they design
and implement youth leadership programs for middle and high schoolers;
support women from neighboring villages to design and implement
breakthroughs in their lives; and engage with youth in gangs to change their
current ways.
   In villages, schools often have limited access to competent teachers,
STEM learning materials, and inadequate infrastructure—for example, they
often have only intermittent internet access. STEM Land is a tremendous
breakthrough in these circumstances. For children in rural India, English is
the second language. Sanjeev chose a popular visual programming
environment—Scratch, developed by the MIT Media Lab. The Scratch 2.0
offline editor is used so that children can program even when there is no
internet connection. All work is intentionally carried out using free, open-
source software, so that anyone can access and use their work.
   Davaselvy, the principal of the school Udavi in Edayanchavadi village,
Tamil Nadu, India, encouraged STEM Land. It is rewarding to see that it is
possible to create spaces in rural India where children can learn through
inspiration rather than through obedience. Children build and program
robots and create their own games. They develop the ability to create
software programs that animate stories they write, create mathematical
games reiterating concepts they have learned, and physically build
something—oscillators, counters, wind chimes, speedometers, cameras!
   In tandem with their work on STEM, children’s leadership programs are
implemented systematically. The STEM Land team members say that the
purpose of education “is beyond fitting in and standing out. Education
should help us learn how to live, to know who we are, to be self-directed
and creative.” They emphasize excellence and encourage students to move
from studying out of fear of examinations to learning for the joy of
achieving their full potential.
   The work at STEM Land is relevant for children throughout the country.
The new Atal Innovation Mission of the Government of India has the vision
of cultivating one million children in STEM education. STEM Land and the
Aura Auro team have much to offer to both teachers and children.
Integrating STEM education along with building the leadership and inner
capacities of children is the key to success.
   Sanjeev is an electronics engineer who received his PhD from Columbia
University. He reflects: “I want to be an instrument of divine consciousness.
In simpler terms, I stand for happiness that comes with self-awareness, of
being one with the universe. People can count on me for focus and to
support their growth.
   “I was involved with various activist movements—these shook my
previous worldview that things are the way they should be; but I saw that
not all was well with the world. I realized that my assumption of being
‘self-made’ had not taken into account the privilege I had growing up and
having opportunities. I committed to use the privilege I had for others.
Supported by my wife, Anita, I questioned many symbols I had held dear
including the Poonal [a cotton thread symbolizing rites of passage for
‘upper castes’ mainly] that I gave up in order to explore who I am beyond
what religion told me. Anita and I continued to make many conscious
choices including moving to India, going vegan, and adopting a child.
   “During this time, I attended a couple of Vipassana courses. These
courses released much of the anger I held from injustices I had seen thrust
on people. I found my actions were no longer governed by self-righteous
anger. I still work for justice and equity to prevail for all, and stand up and
speak out when I see unfairness; but now, I am guided by a higher purpose
that I am meant to manifest.”
   Another example of developing and utilizing capacity: Jerry White,
whom you met in Chapter Seven, summarized his learning experience
through this work, which enhanced his leadership, mentoring, teaching, and
coaching capacities. He notes, “I developed a teachable point of view, with
methodologies to help next-generation leaders to do campaigning for
change. I learned a new vocabulary for systemic change, including the three
elements of a conscious full-spectrum response: wisdom and inner capacity;
understanding and our pattern mind; and knowledge for action.” Alignment
and BEING attuned was important. He revised training protocols and could
see how to teach larger groups, achieving scale faster. Jerry says, “I have
come to appreciate the special type of wise leadership needed for the global
challenges ahead. There are a growing number of people who are learning
how to summon the courage to take on some of society’s most rigidly
embedded institutions in pursuit of life-saving, economy-enhancing
change.”
 Fallacy: Working with science and technology requires us to
 focus and precludes us from dwelling on “soft topics” like respect
 for all. Excellence is what we need, so we should work with those
 who are smart and can excel.
 New Learning: Excellence in science (or any topic) is about
 mastery—building competence and unending, lifelong learning.
 Excellence is about learning and applying that knowledge
 intelligently for the progress of humanity. Discovering and
 sourcing what we stand for and our inner capacities generates
 the alchemy of transformation—the courage to shift the paradigm
 through creating new patterns sourced in universal values of
 dignity, equity, compassion.


        Measurement to Move the Paradigm
What we measure is what we move. Measurement is a core strategy for a
paradigm shift. Measurement is also a key component of going to scale; and
we need new metrics to draw us into manifesting a new reality. Appropriate
indicators, indices, and tools are an integral part of policy, strategy, and
design that leverages human, organizational, and institutional assets. The
measures we hide or ignore as experts are spaces where a few people may
be manipulating systems and culture for their vested interests.
   In our personal lives, we constantly quantify the things we are concerned
about: the amount of money we have in our bank account, our weight if we
want to reduce it, or our blood sugar levels if we have diabetes. We measure
learning and progress—and the measurements we use depend upon our
definition of success. Is learning about scoring high marks and being smart,
or is it also about being emotionally intelligent and responsible? Is progress
about climbing the economic, social, and material ladder, or is it being
prosperous through living our full potential with sophisticated simplicity?