
    Their fifty-two-minute film Writing with Fire profiles Meera. Born into
the low-caste community of Dalits or “untouchables,” Meera was kept
illiterate, married at puberty as tradition dictates and was put behind a veil.
Today, she is a journalist with India’s only newspaper run entirely by Dalit
women—Khabar Lahariya, which means “Waves of News.” Thirty-five-
year-old Meera travels the arid landscape of the state of Uttar Pradesh in
India with journalists she trains, reporting on stories that matter to her
community—issues that are typically ignored by the mainstream, English-
speaking media.
   Riding the smartphone boom in rural India, Meera and her reporters
decide to amplify their voice by making a radical choice—to go digital. The
women train themselves in the art of using smartphones to record,
WhatsApp to transfer, YouTube to publish, and Facebook to share their
unique stories. Despite slow data connections, expensive internet plans, and
resistance from all quarters, these women find creative solutions to their
daily problems in the hopes of building Khabar Lahariya into a strong
digital news brand. Within a single month of shifting to digital, viewership
jumped from under five thousand views per week on their YouTube channel
to over one hundred fifty thousand.
   As a journalist, Meera experiences a rare sense of respect, and as an
individual, she discovers her own voice. Her purpose is clear—to highlight
the inequities that stop her community from achieving their full potential.
The film explores how despite growing up in a violent and oppressive past,
Meera and her reporters choose tools of nonviolence to stand up and
reclaim their identities as human beings. In the global context, the media is
used by the politically and economically powerful to further the interests of
a select few, creating divides. Meera and her intrepid journalists remind us
of the core tenets of journalism—to be fair, fearless, and independent.
   Filmmakers Sushmit and Rintu talk about how the stewardship learning-
in-action program and our conversations deepened their narratives and how
they applied their learning to the heart of their story.
   “We see what shifts women are making to manifest dignity for all: from
women being treated as commodities that can be exploited to women being
equal partners in every aspect of life; from centuries of violence—social,
cultural, economic, physical, emotional—being perpetuated on Dalit
women, to them achieving their potential, and using the nonviolent
approaches of reporting and distributing news. The women demand justice;
they participate in shifting a system and culture that strips people of their
basic rights toward a social and political system that values and protects
every single individual.”
  Rintu Thomas and Sushmit Ghosh skillfully document the new emerging
narratives of radical transformers. They portray the cultural norms and
systems people are shifting. Through their visual language, they have
showcased development initiatives and responsible business as exciting
spaces charged with action that lead to tangible outcomes.
 Fallacy: Artists are creative and gifted people—and many of
 them have studied to develop their talents. We should not
 interfere with their creativity. They mirror what the culture is.
 Leadership and stewardship development has nothing to do with
 them.
 New Learning: Artists are like all other human beings with the
 potential to discover and manifest our inner power and wisdom
 along with our gifts and talents. When artists journey through
 their own leadership and stewardship development based on
 universal values they stand for, they see new invisible patterns
 and they generate spectacular images, symbols, icons, and
 metaphors for an equitable and thriving humanity and planet.


  Filmmakers, musicians, singers, and media professionals all have such a
powerful influence on how we see the world and what decisions we make—
decisions that make the world a better or worse place to be in.
   Marcus Bellringer is a music producer, musician, and activist, expressing
the power of music to heal, motivate, inspire, and entertain.
   Marcus’s desire for equity for all human beings stretches into his activist
upbringing. His mother, Carolyn W. Bell, is a civil rights activist. When he
was young, Marcus participated in various movements for the African
American community in the Hampton Roads area of Virginia. In the early
1980s he was involved in a school busing court case when his family lived
in Norfolk, Virginia. Carolyn and Marcus became a part of a class action
lawsuit aimed at keeping the school system desegregated when the city
council was attempting to reverse the law and resegregate the school
system. “I was taught through the death threats we received that everyone
isn’t ‘clapping for you’ when you are aiming to make a difference. When
the Greekfest riots happened in Virginia Beach in 1989, I was there with my
mother helping to bring media attention to the police violence we
witnessed.”
  When Marcus was student government president at a historically black
high school, the school was faced with being closed, and through the
collective actions of the students, alumni, and other community activists,
they were able to not only save the legacy of the school but implement a
strategy that resulted in a new, multimillion dollar school facility being
built.
   Some of the issues Marcus worked on in the past, like racism and
exploitation of underserved communities, are still present in society. “And
my burning for justice gets renewed when I hear about or see any inequities
or devaluing of a person or community. Through the transformational
leadership learning-in-action programs, I have gained new ways to address
the issues in the African American community and in the world around
systemic racism.
   “I learned that I didn’t have to create a new project or company in order
to shift systems and culture. Shifts can happen from right where I am in life.
I now work with a different intent every day in my profession as a music
producer and recording artist in the music industry. My activity inside of
my work, family, and community is designed for social shifts. Part of my
mission is to impact the systemic issues facing the African American
community using music as the platform for that transformation.”
   Shelita Burke is a musician and technologist and uses these mediums to
reach humanity to cultivate a space of compassion. Shelita says, “One of
the issues I care about deeply is homelessness. I believe everyone should
have access to food and shelter. It is my dream to wake up in a world where
everyone has access to resources, and homelessness is obsolete. There is
inner greatness in all of us, and through the learning-in-action program with
Monica I learned tools that I can use to activate the space inside of us that
helps shift conversations around issues like homelessness.” To Shelita there
is no difference between corporations asking for money when fundraising
for their for-profit businesses and a homeless person asking for money for
food and housing. Shelita shifts conversations in society around
homelessness with integrity and leadership.
   Rose Bartu is an artist, bringing her commitment to peace, equality, and
justice in her songs to the world, creating new narratives through her lyrics
on human rights and freedom. She sees the value of this deep work through
the conscious full-spectrum response for musicians, singers, and artists
alike to unfold the potential of the planet. Rose says, “Learning how to
create shifts for large-scale sustainable change gives me tools to heal my
heart, build resilience, speak up and out about issues I believe need to be
addressed in the world, and empower leaders around me. We are all
interdependent, and I see it as my responsibility as an artist to be the voice
of the oppressed, the disadvantaged, and the forgotten, to heal the world one
song at a time, and to empower and inspire people around the globe.”
   Marcus, Shelita, and Rose are creating new narratives on social issues
through music and social entrepreneurship.
   Pervin Varma, the former CEO of Child Rights and You (CRY) is a
practitioner and coach as well as an accomplished singer. Pervin says, “In
2012, during one of our sessions, I discovered that I truly wish to see
healing and restoration from brokenness through song. And that propelled
me to volunteer at a senior citizen home in Bangalore and start a singing
session. I realize today that without the experience of the transformative
leadership framework—what we refer to as the conscious full-spectrum
response—I would have started just another weekly day of singing together.
But this work opened my world to seeing song as a medium for seniors who
seemed to have given up on life to rediscover new possibilities for
themselves.”
   It was not about just singing or starting a choir; it was about enabling
seniors to get in touch with their inner power and gifts and recognize how
much they had to offer the world. The choir and performance is a way to
express themselves and inspire others. Music became the vehicle to
discover and act from the space of their power. From there was born the
idea of starting a choir called the Choir of the Loaves and Fish (a reference
to a Biblical story of Jesus using five loaves and two fish to feed five
thousand people). Each session, each song, each concert is a message of
hope and the endless possibilities of the human spirit.
   Pervin reflects: “Personally coming to this work after almost thirty years
of work in the world of advertising and then child rights, I finally found a
framework to hold all the pieces of the social change puzzle together. I had
intuitively known that no real change is possible without change being an
inside-out process and had sought to introduce that into the organization I
had worked with for fourteen years. But I still didn’t have a framework to
connect that process with the meticulous work of design, strategy, and
delivering actual results on the ground. The conscious full-spectrum
response template not only brought these three realms together but said that
they had to be worked with simultaneously! It helped me see so clearly
what had been missing elements in the programs and strategies that had
failed or faltered. And why some approaches had worked so smoothly while
others had crashed despite having all the resources needed. It was like
finally finding the language to envision, design, and act in a holistic,
substantive, and sustainable way. And the more I engage with the process
and see it come alive, the more I discover about this work and myself. It is
learning-in-action at its very best!”
               Social Media Changing Narratives
Khadija Moalla, whom you met in Chapters Five and Seven, shifted the
religious discourse in the Arab States from stigma and discrimination to
respect and inclusion of people living with HIV/AIDS by involving them
and by providing learning-in-action programs for thousands of religious and
faith-based leaders from the Muslim and Christian faiths.
   Khadija and her team also shifted the media discourse by involving
hundreds of media leaders in learning-in-action programs. She used social
media to address the problem of HIV/AIDS in the Arab States. The young
bloggers generated new conversations on inclusion and acceptance. Sharif
Abdelaziz, a youth leader from a religious group who worked on Khadija’s
team, is creating new narratives, working with youth from different
religious backgrounds. He says, “From the leadership programs, I learned
that I am capable, I can succeed, I can change, and I can lead. I used all I
learned to create safe environments for people from various religious
backgrounds and political ideologies to hold respectful conversations in
order to reach a point of agreement to work on issues that matter to
everyone. I was successful in ending conflicts and creating new
partnerships among those who were considered historic enemies. I learned
how to look at things differently, to look for solutions from within.”
   Social media is being used to benefit society; but it is also being used to
mislead people. There are several news reports and research studies
unearthing millions of fake social media accounts and activity by internet
bots, which manipulate people and manufacture consensus.64 There are sites
that sell fake accounts and bots and provide services or sell software with
the same purpose. Some of these are underground, or the creators and users
unknown. Persons or organizations accessing or using these bots have the
ability to create exponential hyperactivity on social media, creating
artificial hypes and influencing opinions.
   The key questions we must ask are: Is the regulatory framework strong
and robust? How much do social media companies spend on cracking down
on fake accounts and internet bot automation? Do they and governments
take action and make public the creators and users? How do we create the
norms and practices for a responsible and ethical social media business? We
need an ethical regulatory framework, given the influence and power of
social media today.


 Fallacy: Social media is the new way of connection,
 communication, and information. Whatever is there must be
 correct, or at least have some grain of truth in it.
 New Learning: There are millions of fake users on Facebook.
 Misinformation and lies on social media can mislead and
 manipulate us. As citizens, we must be aware and not be swayed
 by artificial hypes and whatever appears on social media. We
 need responsible and ethical social media business.