
   Auroville was designed by The Mother as a constellation. Aurovilians
live and work independently and at the same time within the interdependent
fabric of values and a few norms and participation in community matters.
People from different cultures, professions, and fifty-five nationalities are in
Auroville.66
   Sanjeev Aggarwal sees the power of spaces that foster progress
emanating from our inherent oneness, where sourcing one’s inner capacity
and wisdom for action in the world is valued. Self-organization is key.
Sanjeev reflects: “A first requirement for being in here is to find one’s inner
BEING and wisdom and being in contact with it and learning to hear its
voice and follow its guidance. The specific guidance for building Auroville
is very minimal. We carve a path for ourselves in our work, mostly working
this out alone, without being influenced by others, without discussion,
without any advice of more experienced colleagues. We work on projects
that call us to act, sometimes as individuals while others work as
collaborators of different initiatives. The principal aim in the doing of these
works is to raise oneself to the highest consciousness possible and also to
infuse the work one does with a higher consciousness.”
   Sanjeev continues to be an encouraging presence. He sees the value of
practice and change of consciousness as distinct from a purely theoretical
understanding of concepts. He says, “In the stewardship learning-in-action
programs, through peer learning groups, we periodically review one’s
practice as well as the change in oneself, with others. For many of us it was
the first time that we shared with others our aspirations and the difficulties
that we faced in manifesting them.”
   Over four hundred people from Auroville and the villages in the
bioregion chose to participate in the stewardship learning-in-action program
over four years, generating numerous initiatives. I am sharing just a few
examples to illustrate some features of a constellation, and citing what this
work means to people. All of them source oneness for strategic action, are
independent and interdependent at the same time, manifest results, and self-
organize. They operate with freedom, based on universal values, and engage
in different areas depending on their interest—such as socially conscious
business, services, governance, measurement and tracking, generating and
documenting new narratives, and enhancing capabilities in people, teams,
and entities.
  Socially and Environmentally Conscious Businesses and Initiatives: You
met Martin Scherfler, who stewards the socially conscious Auroville
Collaborative, a consulting group, and the Auroville Green Practices
Summer School; Sanjeev Ranganathan, from Aura Auro and STEM Land;
Helena Becker, working in Sante, a health care facility, and other entities, to
manifest joy at work; and Uma Haimavati, from Upasana.
   Let me introduce you to Margarita Correa, the cofounder of a socially
and environmentally conscious business, MGEcoduties, with the vision of
offering a new concept of environmentally friendly products that are made
with natural ingredients, using probiotics. Their work is game-changing,
what the team calls “An Earth-Saving Revolution.” They are changing the
mindset of consumers whose uninformed actions fill our planet with trash
and pollution. “With the help of probiotics, we have taken the challenge to
change that mindset,” says Margarita.
  Margarita was born in Colombia and trained as a chemical engineer. She
was subjected to torture and extreme hardship in captivity at the hands of
guerrilla forces in Colombia. Later, after her rescue, she worked as a senior
executive in a multinational company, and then with microorganisms.
   Margarita shares, “Through the stewardship learning-in-action programs,
I design differently, using a conscious full-spectrum approach; I transform
breakdowns into breakthroughs in my work; I foster stewardship
competencies and inner capacities for sustainable and equitable
transformational change, and I am BEING a paradigm shifter/maker.
Recently, when my country, Colombia, signed a peace deal with the
guerrillas, Colombians were asked to vote in a referendum for a yes or no to
that peace deal. If it was not for my learning, insights, and practice in the
stewardship programs, I would have voted for the no, as my scars would not
have allowed me to forgive and move on! The fact that I voted for the yes is
because I have been touched with compassion and endless love.”
   Geert Tomassen (Tomas) is the steward of Annapurna Farms, the largest
certified organic farm in the region near Auroville. Tomas reflects:
“Through my inner journey, I always looked at people as souls on a journey,
so not so much as someone as a good/bad character but looking beyond
that. Through the work in the stewardship program, I feel I have been given
a handle to actually practice this.”
   Deoyani Sarkhot, an environmental scientist, is changing conversations
through her work on bringing affordable technologies to schools and school
children, women, and farmers. She reflects: “My journey is aligning
everything I do with my core values. The same space of possibility lies in
everyone, and I am learning how to invoke that space.”
   Changing Culture by Generating New Conversations: Jaya Berggreen-
Clausen opens doors for partnering, and the spaces she opens are beyond
exclusionary culture, nationality, creed, or caste. “They are about who we
are and deeply care about and where we want to go as a species. It is about
our highest dreams as reality. It is about transcending the fears which hold
us back, not just as individuals, but in the interactions with each other at all
levels, and the divisive forces based on religion, race, nationality, etc. It is
about BEING and living as global citizens.” For example, she designed and
implemented a workshop on Sourcing our Oneness for university students
from Rwanda who study in Chidambaram in India. It was a step toward
building the resilience of students who had lived through dark times in their
lives during the genocide. Jaya reflects: “The Stewardship program and the
approach, tools, and template are related and part of the same weave of
manifesting our higher consciousness in action. No wonder it is so exiting,
no wonder things fall in place!”
  Minhaj Ameen engages to transform governance through new
conversations, and is clear that a critical aspect is to foster integrity, where
connecting with people on universal values and understanding other
perspectives is crucial. Min says, “Failure while experimenting is nothing to
be ashamed of—it is simply part of engaging and trying out new ideas. This
understanding is very empowering.” Mita Dasgupta uses transformative
practices in working groups to generate the cultural shifts that people in
Auroville wish to see.
   Bindu Mohanty sees, shares, and often writes about emerging,
empowering narratives that shift culture toward wholeness. Bindu reflects:
“It is about fostering meditation in action so that we can listen deeply to
others, speak effectively, and most importantly, generate new conversations
for action. It will not be easy, but finally, after many, many years, I am
encouraged to dream again. What is demanded of us is an unwavering
commitment to always act from our stand—from our values—and not just
mechanically apply the tools we learn or mime a newly developed
vocabulary.”
   Exploring New Futures with Neighboring Entities: Bridget Horkan works
in villages in Tamil Nadu, India, focusing on health, healing, and education.
Bridget and the Thamarai team address alcoholism, which is increasingly a
health and social issue in India and in the villages in Tamil Nadu. Bridget
used the transformational design templates, sourcing universal values to
shift cultural norms and systems. The entire program is conducted in Tamil,
with handouts in Tamil. Those affected negatively by alcoholism—families
and substance abusers—access their inner wisdom, what they stand for, to
challenge substance abuse, stigma, and cultural norms associated with
alcoholism. It was not easy in the beginning, and members of the
community did not want to break the denial and silence. Bridget and her
colleagues skilfully enrolled elders and youth and partnered with experts, as
well as Yatra, a Tamil theater group.
   Yatra scripted and put on plays that opened spaces for reflection in the
audience, based on real-life situations. For example, a boy in one play
talked about how he missed his father’s presence at parent-teacher meetings
and school events—his father never showed up because he was drunk.
Seeing and hearing this, men in the audience ruminated about the
consequences of alcoholism in their families.
   Yatra Srinivasan stewards the Tamil theater group Yatra (which means
“journey”). He and his team members participated in the stewardship
learning in-action sessions. He creates plays that communicate effectively
to people in the village and brilliantly integrates the inner spaces of wisdom
and universal values, simultaneously inviting people to have the courage to
change cultural norms, including violence against women and girls, and to
BE in action.
  Bridget grew up on the west coast of Ireland. A formative turning point in
her life was an interview she heard on the radio about the deaths and mass
rapes of up to one million people in the hundred-day Rwandan genocide.
She subsequently went to Rwanda as an aid worker, and this experience
shook her to the core and cracked open an intense period of questioning
both world order and her own internal conditioned patterning and reactions.
   Bridget says, “I have been deeply touched—Rwandan Peter’s sharing
when he realized the potential of this work for transforming the memory of
the genocide buried deep in his body. It made me reflect on the conditioning
I also carry, to forgive without condoning unacceptable actions, and to let
go of what does not serve me anymore. I love the way this work is
inclusive; it cuts hierarchy, and it is embracing. Auroville and the
surrounding villages can hold very different perspectives. During
Stewardship for New Emergence programs, I experience unity and a
collective learning field that feels precious and full of possibility. I feel it is
a very important forum for collective planning the future together and loved
to hear the sharing of our village neighbors who joined us for the learning-
in-action trainings.”
   During one of the learning-in-action sessions, exploring “wild, out-of-
the-box ideas,” Kyoung Hyoun came up with the idea of designing and
implementing a learning-in-action program for the workers in Auroville,
most of whom live in neighboring villages. It blossomed into a powerful
initiative, Developing Stewardship Capacity for Workers in Auroville.
   The transformation is inspiring. Women and men, many with little formal
education, learning to manifest their greatness with the same tools and
techniques as faculty in world-renowned universities! This is a testament to
the beauty and power of the human spirit. The participants immediately put
into practice what they learned right away.
   A woman in the program said that it was the first time in her life anyone
asked her what she cared about and valued what she said. Another woman
said that she had not spoken to her sister-in-law for five years; she was able
to see that her interpretation of what happened could be different from what
actually happened; she could see the incongruence between what she stands
for—equity and dignity—and she decided to break the silence. Several
participants said they learned to overcome their fear of speaking in public.
   These entities and people in the magnificent architecture of constellations
all self-organize and operate in an interdependent way—they are all diverse
but interconnected, working for human unity in different ways based on our
innate oneness. And all are on journeys in which there is more to learn,
design, implement, and transform. This is work in progress.
  In Chapter Eleven, we will see how to generate resonance, alignment,
and synergy between the profusion of projects, initiatives, entities, and
organizations for equitable and sustainable outcomes and impacts.
                          Chapter 11
        Transformative Opportunities
       Attuning and Aligning for Radical
               Transformation
   If you have come here to help me, you are wasting your time. But if you
   have come because your liberation is bound up with mine, then let us
   work together.
                   LILLA WATSON AND INDIGENOUS AUSTRALIANS
Radical transformation—working with the root factors to transform current
realities that do not work for everyone—requires us to source the universal
values of dignity, fairness, and compassion for strategic design, action, and
results. We work in partnership at home, in society, and in our workplace.
Aligning with partners generates synergy, in which the result generated by
each person or group is far more than the sum of the individuals’ or groups’
contribution. BEING attuned with like-spirited partners generates
resonance. Partners design and act from the same value-based foundation,
though the strategies and tactics may differ.
   New pathways for transformative results show up when we nuance the
different expressions of alignment and attunement. In this chapter, we
explore these expressions and the results generated through
transdisciplinary initiatives—whole-systems transformation that shifts
unworkable systems and cultural norms. We overcome workplace silos and
fragmentation, leverage radical transformation, and review unprecedented
openings.
   Transdisciplinary Initiatives Transforming
                   Learning
To address complex problems we need to partner with people who are from
different disciplines. Let’s take climate change—we need experts, leaders,
policy-makers, and program managers in finance, agriculture, industry,
transportation, urban planning, forestry, energy, and media. Civil society,
government, business, and human development specialists are needed
around the table.
  For clarity and ease in application, I differentiate three approaches in
working together with different disciplines.
   First, in interdisciplinary work, we interact to share knowledge through
the frameworks and theories of different branches of knowledge, adding
information, but not necessarily working together to solve a problem. For
example, professionals who are working independently on climate change
may meet in order to learn about what steps others are taking.
   Second, multidisciplinary work implies working on a common goal, such
as reducing carbon emissions, using knowledge and techniques from
different disciplines in a coherent manner.
   Third, the most exciting, transdisciplinary work crosses discipline
boundaries to take a holistic approach, in which different experts from
different disciplines and professionals create new knowledge and
understanding, always informed by universal values of dignity, equity, and
compassion—our resonant space of oneness.
   The definitions I am using for interdisciplinary, multidisciplinary, and
transdisciplinary work are used to generate value-based alternatives; this
differs from conventional definitions in research. As the world’s knowledge
economy expands, transdisciplinary work is an important area for us to
explore, whether in community circles, study groups, or academia, or as we
work on projects and programs.
  Here are examples of noteworthy transdisciplinary initiatives—the
Bailey Bridge Initiative (BBI) and a similar initiative at the Centre for
Disability Studies and Action (CDSA) at the Tata Institute of Social
Sciences in Mumbai (TISS). These are transformative learning-in-action
programs, synthesizing science and technology and social work, as well as
leadership skills, competencies, and inner capacities.
  The purpose of BBI is to foster agency in interested individuals and the
communities they engage with. The participants were trained and equipped
with relevant science and technological tools and techniques for informed
decision-making in social interventions.
   The design team—Muthu Kumaran, Adya Siddharth, and Vivek Coelho
—identified the skills, competencies, and inner capacities for learning and
skillfully integrated exercises to foster the agency of each participant and
the community members they serve. They demystified science and
technological concepts. Participants applied the mapping tools and
techniques—cartography, geographical information systems, spatial
visualization, and reasoning—in field interventions. They used the CFSR
approach, and named their template the Spectral Framework for Agency
Building—SFAB. I encourage people who aim to generate equitable and
sustainable results to use the CFSR approach in the specific context of their
work, and name it accordingly.
   Participants changed the way they work in communities. They saw how
these mapping tools and techniques significantly enhanced their work in the
field. Students formulated their projects on the Spectral Framework for
Agency Building worksheet, and said that this provided clarity and made
visible the systems and cultural shifts needed. Participants learned and
integrated the agency building components in the workshops they designed
for people in the village. They fostered agency in people in the community,
and rather than doing work for them, they encouraged individuals to source
their inner capacities for action. Men and women from the village took the
initiative and worked with government officials to resolve their issues.
 Let me introduce the main architects of the Bailey Bridge Initiative:
Muthu Kumaran, Adya Siddarth, and Vivek Coelho.
   Muthu Kumaran, an engineer, enhances students’ ability to design and
implement their own breakthrough initiatives as well as foster the agency of
people in the community. Muthu fosters their growth and notices how
students shift from being knowledge-centric to using knowledge-based
action.
   Muthu is on a continuous learning journey himself. After the Bailey
Bridge summer school experience he reflected: “From the days of
conceptualizing, designing, and conducting the workshop I stood by my
values of agency, dignity, and empathy all throughout. Sometimes in the
tightness of time and work I was frustrated, but I got back into the flow by
continuously reminding myself of my stand—it really helped me to deliver
what I intended to. This was evident from the interest shown by participants
who worked late after the sessions and designed their breakthrough
initiatives for larger outcomes and impact. And most importantly, they were
able to see that technology is just a tool which is value-neutral; and that it is
the person using it, based on their values and purpose, who can make the
technology generate its full potential for social transformation. Some
participants said it was one of the best workshops they ever attended
because it was unique in integrating agency-building praxes along with
technological mapping skills and practical work in social sciences.”
   Adya Siddarth made a conscious career shift from information
technology to social sciences, often wondering if it was a big mistake. Adya
says, “A key difference in my life is the confidence with which I stand
steady and walk the path of the road less traveled. There was always a voice
in me that said, ‘I care for the society and the environment … and I want to
do something about it.’ This work has allowed me to articulate what I stand
for, what my purpose in life is, and what I can contribute to society. That by
itself has been a huge shift. I no longer need assurance from another person
that I am doing the ‘right’ thing. Now, I know who I am and how I can
make a difference in this world.”
   At the end of the Bailey Bridge summer school, Adya noted, “I stand for
compassion and justice. I was able to embody what I stand for during the
sessions by being fully present, observing, feeling the pulse of the
participants. I learned that sourcing inner power for myself and that of
others lies in my BEING. When I am grounded in the space of my wisdom
and work from compassion, people can see who I am BEING, and they
open up like flowers blossoming. I learned the importance of rigor and
attention to detail even in the smallest of tasks.”
  Vivek Coelho stands for integrity, justice, and equity. He develops
community beach monitoring and restoration systems and is establishing
community disaster risk reduction cells. After the Bailey Bridge summer
school, Vivek shared, “I learned that when I live my stand, I am open to
learn and create an enabling environment for others to learn. Participants
were able to notice their own shift from output-driven initiatives to
outcome- and impact-driven initiatives. Templates such as the conscious
full-spectrum response and the transformational results chain were useful to
design and implement with clarity. They noticed the difference between
partial and full-spectrum responses and crafted well-informed strategies
based on universal values.”
   The Bailey Bridge Initiative is an excellent example of professionals
designing a transdisciplinary initiative. One participant said although she
belonged to a “tech” discipline, she did not realize that these skill sets can
be used in a value-based, constructive manner for addressing social issues.
The Spectral Framework for Agency Building (SFAB) was instrumental in
bridging the technical and discipline-based skills of engineering,
information technology, social sciences, and leadership development, where
universal values and agency building transcend the boundaries of each
discipline and the social interventions carry the shifts needed in systems and
cultural norms. This is what the Bailey Bridge Initiative envisioned and
what it stands for.
   Vivek Coelho organized the event “A Tide Turns” in 2017 with Legal Aid
to Women (LAW) Trust and Social Need Education and Human Awareness
(SNEHA). Members of the fishing communities from Tamil Nadu and
Puducherry spoke at the event. They shared what they cared deeply about
and the values they stood for, described beach profiling in the context of
restoring the ecosystem, and inspired the audience with their commitment
and confidence. In this transdisciplinary program at the community level,
people from fishing communities learn how to enhance their leadership
through transformative learning-in-action programs in Tamil.